# Moving Folders and Files [](id=moving-folders-and-files)

The move operation is much more flexible than the 
[copy operation](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/copying-folders). 
Copying only works with folders, and you can't copy them between repositories. 
The move operation, however, works with files and folders within or between 
repositories. 

+$$$

**Note:** Depending on the repository implementation, you may get unexpected 
behavior when moving folders between repositories. Moving a folder also moves 
its contents via separate move operations for each item in the folder. In some 
repository implementations, if any move sub-operation fails then the parent move 
operation also fails. In other repository implementations, the results of 
successful sub-operations remain even if others fail, which leaves a partially 
complete move of the whole folder. 

$$$

To move a folder, use the 
[`DLAppService`](@platform-ref@/7.1-latest/javadocs/portal-kernel/com/liferay/document/library/kernel/service/DLAppService.html) 
method `moveFolder`: 

    moveFolder(long folderId, long parentFolderId, ServiceContext serviceContext)

For a full description of this method and its parameters, see its 
[Javadoc](@platform-ref@/7.1-latest/javadocs/portal-kernel/com/liferay/document/library/kernel/service/DLAppService.html#moveFolder-long-long-com.liferay.portal.kernel.service.ServiceContext-). 
This method is similar to `copyFolder`, but it doesn't let you change the 
folder's name or description, and it can move folders between repositories. 
Also, the move operation is recursive---it also moves the folder's contents. 

The operation for moving files is almost identical. To move files, use the 
`DLAppService` method `moveFileEntry`: 

    moveFileEntry(long fileEntryId, long newFolderId, ServiceContext serviceContext)

For a full description of this method and its parameters, see its 
[Javadoc](@platform-ref@/7.1-latest/javadocs/portal-kernel/com/liferay/document/library/kernel/service/DLAppService.html#moveFileEntry-long-long-com.liferay.portal.kernel.service.ServiceContext-). 

The Documents and Media Library's 
[`EditEntryMVCActionCommand`](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-portal/blob/master/modules/apps/document-library/document-library-web/src/main/java/com/liferay/document/library/web/internal/portlet/action/EditEntryMVCActionCommand.java) 
class contains an example of both methods. This class's `moveEntries` method 
iterates over the IDs of several existing folders (`folderIds`), calling 
`moveFolder` to move each folder to a different folder (`newFolderId`). The same 
approach is then used with `moveFileEntry` to move several files 
(`fileEntryIds`) to the same folder: 

    protected void moveEntries(ActionRequest actionRequest) throws Exception {

            long newFolderId = ParamUtil.getLong(actionRequest, "newFolderId");

            ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                    DLFileEntry.class.getName(), actionRequest);

            long[] folderIds = ParamUtil.getLongValues(
                    actionRequest, "rowIdsFolder");

            // Move the folders
            for (long folderId : folderIds) {
                    _dlAppService.moveFolder(folderId, newFolderId, serviceContext);
            }

            long[] fileEntryIds = ParamUtil.getLongValues(
                    actionRequest, "rowIdsFileEntry");

            // Move the files
            for (long fileEntryId : fileEntryIds) {
                    _dlAppService.moveFileEntry(fileEntryId, newFolderId, serviceContext);
            }

            ...
    }

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Copying Folders](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/copying-folders)
