# Managing Permissions [](id=managing-permissions)

With the staging environment, there are many different options to use for
building and managing a site and its pages. Sometimes limiting the access to
staging's subset of powerful features is desired by some administrators. You can
manage access to the staging environment by creating or modifying a role to
possess certain permissions. To create/modify a role, complete the following
steps:

1.  Navigate to the *Control Panel* &rarr; *Users* &rarr; *Roles*.

2.  To create a new role, select the *Add* button
    (![Add](../../../images/icon-add.png)) and complete the New Role menu. Once
    you have a new role created, or you've decided on the role you'd like to
    modify, select the role's *Actions* icon
    (![Actions](../../../images/icon-actions.png)) and select *Edit*.

3. From the top menu, select *Define Permissions*.

The most obvious permissions for staging are the general permissions that look
similar to the permissions for most Liferay apps. These permissions can be found
in the *Site Administration* &rarr; *Publishing* &rarr; *Staging* section of the
Define Permissions menu. This includes

- *Access in Site Administration*
- *Add to Page*
- *Configuration*
- *Permissions*
- *Preferences*
- *View*

Also, there are some site resource permissions that deal directly with staging.
These permissions are located in the *Control Panel* &rarr; *Sites* &rarr;
*Sites* section in the Define Permissions menu. The relevant site resource
permissions related to staging are listed below:

**Add Page Variation:** hides/shows the *Add Page Variation* button on the
Staging Bar's Manage Page Variations screen.

**Add Site Pages Variation:** hides/shows the *Add Site Pages Variation* button
on the Staging Bar's Manage Site Page Variations screen.

**Export/Import Application Info:** if the Publish Staging permission is not
granted, hides/shows the application level Export/Import menu. The Configuration
permission for the Export/Import app is also required.

**Export/Import Pages:** if the Publish Staging permission is not granted,
hides/shows the Export/Import app in the Site Administration menu.

**Manage Staging:** hides/shows the Staging Configuration menu located in the
Site Administration &rarr; *Publishing* &rarr; *Staging* &rarr; *Options*
(![Options](../../../images/icon-options.png)) menu.

**Publish Application Info:** hides/shows the application level Staging menu.

**Publish Staging:** hides/shows the *Publish to Live* button on the Staging Bar
and hides/shows the *Add Staging Process* button
(![Add](../../../images/icon-add.png)) in the Site Administration menu's Staging
app.

**View Staging:** if Publish Staging, Manage Pages, Manage Staging, or Update
permissions are not granted, hides/shows the Site Administration menu's Staging
app.

Notice that some of the permissions listed above are related to the
export/import functionality. Since these permissions are directly affected by
the Publish Staging permission, they are important to note. Visit the
[Importing/Exporting Pages and Content](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/importing-exporting-pages-and-content)
section for more details on importing/exporting site and page content.
