# Using Get Entries Screenlet [](id=using-get-entries-screenlet)

You'll use Get Entries Screenlet by following the same basic steps as the 
previous article: insert the Screenlet XML in an activity or fragment layout, 
and then implement the Screenlet's listener in the activity or fragment class. 
The following steps show you how to use Get Entries Screenlet in 
`EntriesFragment`.

## Inserting the Screenlet in the Layout [](id=inserting-the-screenlet-in-the-layout)

When you used the Guestbook Mobile SDK directly, you didn't need to create a 
layout file for `EntriesFragment`. This was because `EntriesFragment` extended 
`ListFragment` and therefore contained an implicit `ListView` object. You used 
that `ListView` instead of having to define one in a layout file. The 
`EntriesFragment` class, however, no longer extends `ListFragment`. The 
`ListView` the Screenlet uses to display entries is part of the Screenlet's View 
class. To use Get Entries Screenlet with `EntriesFragment`, you need to create a 
layout file for the fragment and then put the Screenlet's XML in it. In your 
project's `res/layout` directory, create `fragment_entries.xml` and replace its 
contents with the following code:

    <com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.GetEntriesScreenlet
        xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
        xmlns:liferay="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
        android:id="@+id/getentries_screenlet"
        android:layout_width="match_parent"
        android:layout_height="match_parent"
        liferay:layoutId="@layout/entries_default"/>

As with Get Guestbooks Screenlet, you'll use the `android:id` value to create a 
reference to the Screenlet. First, though, you need to configure 
`EntriesFragment` to use this layout. Do so now by replacing the `onCreate` 
method in `EntriesFragment` with the following `onCreateView` method:

    @Override
    public View onCreateView(LayoutInflater inflater, ViewGroup container,
                             Bundle savedInstanceState) {
        // Inflate the layout for this fragment
        View view = inflater.inflate(R.layout.fragment_entries, container, false);
        _guestbookId = getArguments().getLong("guestbookId");

        return view;
    }

This method inflates the `fragment_entries.xml` layout, sets `_guestbookId` to 
the `"guestbookId"` value from the bundle arguments, and returns the Android 
`View` object. 

Next, you need to implement the Screenlet's `GetEntriesListener` interface in 
`EntriesFragment`. 

## Implementing the Screenlet's Listener [](id=implementing-the-screenlets-listener)

First, change the class declaration of `EntriesFragment` to implement the 
`GetEntriesListener` interface. The class declaration should now look like this: 

    public class EntriesFragment extends Fragment implements GetEntriesListener {...

Android Studio marks this class declaration as an error, because you haven't 
implemented the listener's methods yet. Do so now by adding the following 
methods to the class: 

    @Override
    public void onGetEntriesSuccess(List<EntryModel> entries) {
    }

    @Override
    public void onGetEntriesFailure(Exception e) {
        Toast.makeText(getActivity(), "Couldn't get entries " + e.getMessage(), Toast.LENGTH_LONG).show();
    }

    @Override
    public void onItemClicked(final EntryModel entry) {
    }

Note the `onGetEntriesSuccess` and `onItemClicked` methods are empty. You don't 
need to do anything in `onGetEntriesSuccess` because the Screenlet's View 
already displays the entries. You could put a Toast or log message in this 
method to indicate success, but this isn't required. The `onItemClicked` 
implementation exists to let the app respond when the user selects an entry in 
the UI. For example, you may want to navigate to an activity or fragment that 
displays additional detail about the selected entry. The app doesn't yet, 
however, contain such an activity or fragment. For now, you can leave 
`onItemClicked` empty. 

Now you're ready to register `EntriesFragment` as the Screenlet's listener, and 
set the Screenlet's guestbook ID. To do both, you need to get a reference to the 
Screenlet. Once you have this reference, you can call the Screenlet's 
`setListener` and `setGuestbookId` methods. Do this now by inserting the 
following code immediately above the `return` in the `onCreateView` method: 

    GetEntriesScreenlet getEntriesScreenlet = 
        (GetEntriesScreenlet) view.findViewById(R.id.getentries_screenlet);
    getEntriesScreenlet.setListener(this);
    getEntriesScreenlet.setGuestbookId(_guestbookId);

Awesome! Now you're ready to put this fragment to use.

## Adding the Fragment to the Activity [](id=adding-the-fragment-to-the-activity)

When you used the Guestbook Mobile SDK to display entries, you did so with a 
[fragment transaction](http://developer.android.com/guide/components/fragments.html#Transactions). 
You'll do the same thing here. Since you need to display the selected 
guestbook's entries, you need to perform the fragment transaction in the 
`onItemClicked` method of `GuestbooksActivity`. Currently, `onItemClicked` 
changes the Action Bar's title to the selected guestbook and then closes the 
drawer. Now you'll add `EntriesFragment` to this method via a fragment 
transaction. Replace the `onItemClicked` method in `GuestbooksActivity` with the 
following code: 

    @Override
    public void onItemClicked(final GuestbookModel guestbook) {
        actionBar.setTitle(guestbook.getName());

        EntriesFragment entriesFragment = EntriesFragment.newInstance(guestbook.getGuestbookId());
        FragmentTransaction transaction = getSupportFragmentManager().beginTransaction();
        transaction.replace(R.id.fragment_container, entriesFragment);
        transaction.commit();

        drawer.closeDrawers();
    }

In addition to the same `setTitle` and `closeDrawers` calls, `onItemClicked` now 
contains the fragment transaction. Note that this fragment transaction is 
identical to the one you used earlier in this Learning Path. The transaction 
itself is the same, regardless of where in the activity it occurs. You even use 
the same fragment container. 

Great job! You're finished! Run the app in the emulator and log in with your 
credentials. Your app now uses the Get Guestbooks and Get Entries Screenlets to 
show the same guestbooks and entries as the Guestbook portlet. 

![Figure 1: Get Entries Screenlet displays guestbook entries in your app.](../../images/android-guestbooks-entries-screenlets.png)

Congratulations! Now you know how to use the Mobile SDK and Liferay Screens. You 
even know how to display content from a custom portlet by writing your own 
Screenlets. 
