# Installing Liferay Maven Artifacts [](id=installing-liferay-maven-artifacts)

To create Liferay plugins using Maven, you'll need the archives required by
Liferay (e.g., required JAR and WAR files). This won't be a problem--Liferay
provides them as Maven artifacts. 

So how do you get Liferay artifacts? There are several different ways you can
obtain them. The most popular way to retrieve Liferay Maven artifacts is to
install them from the Central Repository. Alternatively, if you absolutely must
have the latest Liferay pre-release, you can intall the Liferay Maven artifacts
from the Liferay Nexus source repository. These installation methods
automatically install artifacts to your local `.m2` repository when packaging
your Maven project. Finally, you can download a Liferay-provided ZIP file that
lets you install artifacts to local intranets and repositories without relying
on public network accessibility.

This tutorial explains how to install the Maven artifacts required for Liferay
plugin development. For more information on the Maven artifact retrieval
process, see the
[Getting Started with Maven](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/getting-started-with-maven)
tutorial.

First, consider the installation process using the Central Repository.

## Installing Artifacts from the Central Repository [](id=installing-artifacts-from-the-central-repository)

Using the Central Repository to install Liferay Maven artifacts is very
straightforward and only requires that you specify your plugin's dependencies
via its `pom.xml` file. In fact, the first time you use Maven to build a
Liferay Maven plugin project, Maven automatically downloads the required
artifacts from the Central Repository into your local `.m2` repository, if
they're not found in your `.m2` repository or any of your configured repository
servers. You'll see it happen when you package your Liferay plugins. This
automation puts more emphasis on the development of your Liferay project and
less on managing artifacts.

When packaging your plugin, the automatic Maven artifact installation process
only downloads the artifacts necessary for that particular plugin. That plugin's
dependencies determines the artifacts that are installed into your local `.m2`
repository. The `pom.xml` file of your project is where you specify your
project's dependencies. You'll learn more about the POM throughout the Maven
tutorials.

You can view the published Liferay Maven artifacts on the Central Repository by
searching for *liferay maven* in the repo's Search bar. For convenience, you can
reference the available artifacts at
[http://search.maven.org/#search|ga|1|liferay maven](http://search.maven.org/#search|ga|1|liferay%20maven).
You can use the Latest Version column as a guide to see what is available for
the intended version of @product@ for which you're developing.

Sometimes, the Liferay Maven artifacts for a release are not immediately
available on Maven's Central Repository. In some cases, the Central Repository
might still be synced to a previous release of Liferay. If this occurs, download
the Liferay Maven artifacts from Liferay's repository. You'll learn how to do
this next.

## Installing Artifacts from the Liferay Repository [](id=installing-artifacts-from-the-liferay-repository)

If you'd like to access Liferay's latest Maven artifacts, you can configure
Maven to automatically download and install them from
[Liferay's Nexus repository](https://repository.liferay.com). Once configured, 
Maven automatically downloads the required artifacts from the Liferay Maven
repository into your local `.m2` repository, if they're not found in your `.m2`
repository or any of your configured repository servers. You'll see it happen
when you package your Liferay plugins. 

In order to access artifacts from the Liferay Maven repository, you'll need to
configure Maven to look for them there. First, specify the Liferay repository's
credentials in your project's parent `pom.xml` file as follows:

    <repositories>
        <repository>
            <id>liferay-public-snapshots</id>
            <name>Liferay Public Snapshots</name>
            <url>https://repository.liferay.com/nexus/content/repositories/liferay-public-snapshots</url>
            <snapshots>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
            </snapshots>
        </repository>
    </repositories>
	  
	<pluginRepositories>
        <pluginRepository>
            <id>liferay-public-snapshots</id>
            <url>https://repository.liferay.com/nexus/content/repositories/liferay-public-snapshots/</url>
            <snapshots>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
            </snapshots>
        </pluginRepository>
    </pluginRepositories>

The above configuration retrieves artifacts from Liferay's snapshot repository.
Liferay also provides a
[release repository](https://repository.liferay.com/nexus/content/repositories/liferay-public-releases/),
which you can also access by modifying the `<id>`, `<name>`, and `<url>` tags to
point to that repo. You'll also need to replace the `<snapshots>` tag with the
`<releases>` tag:

    <releases>
        <enabled>true</enabled>
    </releasess>

If you've configured the Liferay Nexus repository to access pre-release Liferay
Maven artifacts, and you've already been syncing from the Central Repository,
you may need to clear out parts of your local repository to force Maven to
redownload the newer artifacts. Also, do not leave the Liferay repository
configured when publishing artifacts to Maven Central. You must comment out the
Liferay Repository credentials when publishing your artifacts.

Next, when interacting with the Liferay Repository from the command line, you'll
need to use specialized commands to access it. For instance, consider the
Central Repository's offered Liferay archetypes. You can access them by running
`mvn archetype:generate`. There is no need to specify the Central Repository in
the command because it is configured by default. To access the Maven archetypes
hosted in Liferay's Maven repository, however, you need to specify it in the
command:

    mvn archetype:generate -DarchetypeCatalog=https://repository.liferay.com/nexus/content/repositories/liferay-public-snapshots

<!-- Link to *Generating New Projects Using Archetypes* tutorial here when it's
available. -Cody -->

The Liferay Maven repository offers a good alternative for those who want the
most up-to-date Maven artifacts produced by Liferay. With a few simple
configurations, you can download and install pre-release Liferay Maven
artifacts.

Finally, you'll learn how to install Liferay Maven artifacts using a ZIP file.

## Installing Artifacts from a Zip File [](id=installing-artifacts-from-a-zip-file)

For those who don't have access to a public network or just prefer to install
Liferay's Maven artifacts locally without relying on a remote repository, you
can download Liferay's Maven artifacts as a Zip file. Well, sort of. The
downloadable Zip doesn't actually contain Liferay's Maven artifacts; it contains
scripts that let you download all of Liferay's artifacts and install them to a
Maven repository of your choice.

You can download the Liferay artifacts from Liferay's Customer Portal.

1.  Navigate to the [Digital Enterprise](https://web.liferay.com/group/customer/dxp/downloads/digital-enterprise)
    download page in Liferay's Customer Portal and select *Maven* from the
    drop-down list to download the latest version of @product@ Maven.

    ![Figure 1: Select *Maven* from the drop-down list to download the @product@ Maven artifact Zip file.](../../../images-dxp/maven-select-download.png)

2.  Unzip the file and navigate to it in your command prompt. Then run the Ant
    command without a target.
    
        ant
    
    You can verify Liferay's artifacts are being installed by reading the output
    messages in your command prompt. The artifacts are downloaded from Liferay's
    Nexus repository.

    By default, all of Liferay's Maven artifacts are installed in your
    `[USER_HOME]/.m2` repository. You can change where the artifacts are
    installed by creating a `build.[USER_NAME}.properties` file in the Liferay
    Portal Maven folder and setting the `local.repository.path` property to the
    folder you want your artifacts to reside in.

Now you have all of Liferay's Maven artifacts locally and can delegate them to
any repository or folder you choose.

Congratulations! You've downloaded the Liferay artifacts and installed them to
your chosen repository.
