
# Collaboration Suite [](id=liferay-collaboration-sui-4)

Liferay Portal ships with a robust suite of collaboration applications which
you can use to build communities of users for your site. These applications
provide all the features that you would expect of standalone versions outside
of a portal setting. The difference with Liferay's collaboration suite,
however, is that all of the applications share a common look and feel, security
model and architecture. They inherit the strengths of being part of Liferay's
development platform so you can use them in combination with Liferay's user
management and content management features to build a well-integrated,
feature-rich web site.

This chapter focuses on how to use Liferay's collaboration suite. We explain
how to set up and administer:

-   Blogs
-   Calendars
-   Message Boards
-   Wikis
-   Polls
-   Chat
-   Mail

We'll discuss how these features work together to facilitate information flow
within your portal and provide an enhanced experience for your users.

## Understanding Liferay's common configuration options [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-understanding-liferays-common-configuration-options-0) [](id=understanding-liferay-s-common-configuration-options)

Just like siblings have common features inherited from their parents,
applications that ship with Liferay also share common features. These include
look and feel, communication, scoping, sharing, permissions, archive
configurations, and exporting/importing portlet data. So before we get into the
nitty gritty of the applications themselves, it's best to cover these common
features first, starting with the look and feel configuration options.

### Look and Feel [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-look-and-feel-0)

An administrator can access the look and feel configuration menu of any Liferay
portlet by clicking on the wrench icon at the top right corner of the portlet
and selecting *Look and Feel*. The location of the wrench icon and other
portlet icons (minimixe, maximize, and remove) may vary, depending on your
theme. Liferay portlets' look and feel dialog boxes contain seven tabs:

- Portlet Configuration
- Text Styles
- Background Styles
- Border Styles
- Margin and Padding
- Advanced Styling
- WAP Styling

After making customizations on any tab, remember to click the *Save* button to
apply your changes. To see the effect of your changes, you may have to refresh
the page. If you don't like the effect of your changes, click the *Reset*
button to discard them.

On the Portlet Configuration tab, you can check the *Use Custom Title* box to
rename your portlet's title. The value you enter in the Portlet Title box will
be displayed at the top of the portlet window on the page. You can also select
a language from the Portlet Title dropdown menu. If you've provided a language
key translation for the language you select, the your portlet's title will be
displayed in the selected language.

![Figure 7.1: The Porlet Configuration tab of the Look and Feel Box allows you
to define a custom portlet title, link porlet URLs to a specific page, and
select whether or not portlet borders should be
displayed.](../../images/look-and-feel-portlet-configuration.png)

If you select a page in the *Link Portlet URLs to Page* dropdown menu, all
portlet URLs will point to the page you selected. The current page is the
default. Note that you can use the Asset Publisher's View in a Specific Portlet
feature and web content articles' Display Page attribute to achieve a more
elegant solution for displaying the full view of web content articles on
specific pages. Please see the Display Page section of chapter 5 for details.

You can also choose whether or not to display borders around your portlet. By
default, borders are displayed. Be careful about turning portlet borders off;
some themes assume that portlet borders are turned on and may not display
correctly with them turned off.

The Text Styles tab allows you to configure format of the text that appears in
the portlet. The fonts you can choose from include Arial, Georgia, Times New
Roman, Tahoma, Trebuchet MS, and Verdana. Arial is the default. You can set the
text to bold, italics, or both. You can set the font size anywhere from 0.1 em
to 12 em, with 0.1 em increments. 1 em is the default. You can set the text
color to any six digit hex color code. If you'd like help choosing a color,
click on the pencil icon to open the color palette. You can set the text
alignment to left, center, right, or justified. (Justified text is both left
and right aligned.) You can set an underline, overline, or strikethrough as the
text decoration. The default text decoration is none.

![Figure 7.2: The Text Styles tab lets you configure the format of the text
that appears in the portlet.](../../images/look-and-feel-text-styles.png)

You can set the word spacing anywhere from -1 em to 0.95 em, with 0.5 em
increments. 0 em is the default. You can set the line height anywhere from 0 em
to 12 em, with 0.1 em increments. 0 em is the default. Finally, you can set the
letter spacing anywhere from -10 px to 50 px, with 1 px increments. 0 px is the
default.

The Background Styles tab allows you to specify the portlet's background color.
You can enter any six digit hex color code or you click on the pencil icon to
use the color palette.

![Figure 7.3: The Background Styles tab lets you specify the portlet's
background color.](../../images/look-and-feel-background-styles.png)

On the Border Styles tab, you can configure your portlet's border width, border
style, and border color. For each of these attributes, leave the *Same for All*
box checked to apply the same settings to top, right, bottom, and left borders. 

![Figure 7.4: The Border Styles tab lets you specify a border width, style, and
color for each side of the
portlet.](../../images/look-and-feel-border-styles.png)

For border width, you can specify any % value, em value, or px value. For
border style, you can select dashed, double, dotted, groove, hidden, inset,
outset, ridge, or solid. For border color, you can enter any six digit hex
color code, just like for the text color and background color. You can also use
the color palette.

The Margin and Padding tab allows you to specify margin and padding lengths for
the edges of your portlet. Just like for border styles, leave the *Same for
All* box checked to apply the same settings to each side (top, right, bottom,
and left) of the portlet.

![Figure 7.5: The Margin and Padding tab allows you to specify margin and
paddings lengths for the sides of your
portlet.](../../images/look-and-feel-margin-and-padding.png)

For both padding and margin, you can specify any % value, em value, or px
value.

The Advanced Styling tab displays current information about your portlet,
including your portlet's Liferay ID and CSS classes.

![Figure 7.6: The Advanced Styling tab displays your portlet's Liferay ID and
allows you to enter CSS code to customize the look and feel of your
portlet.](../../images/look-and-feel-advanced-styling.png)

On this tab, you can also enter custom CSS class names for your portlet and
custom CSS code. Clicking the *Add a CSS rule for just this portlet* or *Add a
CSS rule for all portlets like this one* links adds the CSS code shells into
your custom CSS text box. If you check the *Update my styles as I type* box,
your CSS code will be dynamically applied to your portlet so you can see the
effects of your edits.

The WAP Styling tab allows you to specify a custom portlet title that will be
displayed when mobile devices using the Wireless Application Protocol make page
requests. You can also set the initial window state to normal or minimized.
Normal is the default.

![Figure 7.7: The WAP Styling tab lets you enter a custom portlet title to be
displayed to devices making page requests via WAP; it also allows you to
specify an initial window state.](../../images/look-and-feel-wap-styling.png)

Next, let's discuss exporting and importing portlet data.

### Export/Import [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-exportimport-0)

Some Liferay portlets allow you to export or import portlet data. These include
many of Liferay's collaborative applications, such as the Blogs, Wiki, and
Message Boards portlets. To export or import portlet data, right-click on the
wrench icon of your portlet and select *Export/Import*. Exporting portlet data
produces a `.lar` file that you can save and import into another portlet
applicaton of the same type. To import portlet data, you must select a `.lar`
file. Be careful not to confuse portlet-specific `.lar` files with
site-specific `.lar` files. See the Backing up and Restoring Pages section of
chapter 2 for a discussion of exporting and importing data across an entire
site.

![Figure 7.8: When exporting portlet data, you can choose which categories of
information to include.](../../images/portlet-export.png)

Each portlet has different configuration options. Checking the *Setup* box
selects the portlet's saved configuration for export. Checking the *User
Preferences* box selects saved portlet configurations of specific users. The
*Data* box is the most important one--check this to select your portlet's data
(like blog entries, message board posts, or wiki articles, for example) for
export. When you check the *Data* box, more options appear, allowing you to
choose specific kinds of metadata to include and to select a data range. Check
the *Permissions* box if you'd like to export your the permissions defined for
your portlet. When you check this box, a subbox called *Permissions Assigned to
Roles* appears. If you wish, you can export your portlet's permissions but not
the permissions assigned to roles. Finally, you can check the *Categories* box
to include categories for export. When selected, all categories referenced by
portlet data will be exported or imported, keeping their hierarchy.

![Figure 7.9: When importing portlet data, you can choose which categories of
information to use.](../../images/portlet-import.png)

When you import portlet data, only the data types you select will be
overwriten. If you'd like to import portlet data, you have to select a `.lar`
file. You can import any items that were included when your `.lar` file was
created. Note that user preferences can only be successfully imported when the
user UUIDs match. Additionally, you can import any archived setups into your
portlet, if any. Archived setups provide a means to save multiple portlet
configurations and to switch between them. We discuss archived setups below. If
you check the *Delete portlet data before importing* box, *all* data created by
the portlets will be deleted just before the import process. Be careful, some
portlets on others pages may be referencing this data.

Next, let's discuss the concept of a portlet's scope.

### Scope [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-scope-0)

As we learned earlier, roles can be scoped by the portal, by a site, or by an
organization. A role only takes effect within its scope. For example, a Message
Boards Administrator role with complete access to the Message Boards portlet
has different permissions based on the role's scope. If it's a portal role,
members have permission to administer message boards across the entire portal.
If it's a site role, members only have permission to administer message boards
within the site where they've been assigned the role. For organizations with
sites, site roles are automatically assigned to organization members based on
the organization roles they have. So for an organization-scoped Message Boards
administrator role, members only have permission to administer message boards
within the site of the organization that assigned the role to them. 

We also use the word *scope* to refer to the data set of a portlet. By default,
when a portlet is added to a page in a site, it is *scoped* for that site. This
means that its data belongs to that site. If the portlet is added to a page in
a different site, it employs a completely different data set. This enables you
to place a Message Boards portlet in one site with one set of categories and
threads, and place another Message Boards portlet in different site with a
different set of categories and threads.

Scoping by site means that you can only have one Message Boards portlet per
site. If you add one Message Boards portlet to a page in a site and add another
Message Boards portlet to a different page in the same site, the second Message
Boards portlet contains exactly the same data as the first. This is because, by
default, the Message Boards portlet is scoped by site. Most of Liferay's other
portlets also default to being scoped by site.

To avoid this limitation, many Liferay portlets can be scoped by page. In this
case, the data sets of page-scoped portlets serve a single page, not an entire
site. If you set the scope of a portlet to *page* instead of *site*, you can
add any number of these portlets to different pages, and then they have
different sets of data. This allows you to have more than one message board per
site if you wish. Most portlets, however, default to the "native"
configuration, and have their scopes set to the site where they are placed.

Unless otherwise noted, all the portlets in this chapter support scoping by
portal (global), site (default), or page (select layout &rarr; current page).
This grants you some flexibility in how you want to set up your portal. You can
configure the scope of a portlet with just a few simple steps.

1.  Click the *Menu* icon in the portlet window (the wrench).

2.  Select *Configuration*.

3.  Select the *Scope* tab.

4.  Use the drop-down menu to set the scope.

5.  Click *Save*.

![Figure 7.10: Changing the scope of a
portlet](../../images/05-changing-portlet-scope.png)

That's all it takes to change the scope for a particular portlet instance. By
setting the scope to *Current Page*, you can add as many of these portlets to a
site as you want, provided they are all added to separate pages. 

Another useful feature of Liferay's portlets is Archived Setups.  

### Archived Setups [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-archived-setups-0)

Once you've configured a portlet, Archived Setups enables you to save those
settings in an "archive". If someone goes in and changes the settings of a
particular portlet, it then becomes easy to revert those changes back to the
original, archived configuration.

To create an archived setup, click the *Configuration* option from the menu in
the portlet's title bar. If the current settings of the portlet you're
configuring are the ones you want to archive, click the *Archive/Restore Setup*
link. If not, change and save the settings until you have the portlet
configured the way you want it, and then click the *Archive/Restore Setup*
link.

There is only one field to fill out. Enter a name for your archive and click
*Save*. You should now see your archive in the list. If you ever need to revert
the portlet to these archived settings, you can click *Actions &rarr; Restore*
next to the archived setup you want to restore.

Unless otherwise noted, all of the portlets in this chapter support this
feature. This is particularly useful for portlets that have a lot of
configuration options, such as the Message Boards portlet. 

Next, we'll see how permissions apply to Liferay portlets in general. 

### Permissions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-permissions-0)

All of Liferay's portlets support Liferay's robust, fine-grained permissions
system. Some higher level permissions can be configured in the permissions tab
of the portlet configuration dialog box. You can grant roles permission to add
the portlet to a page, configure the portlet, or view the portlet. To set these
permissions, go to the *Configuration* menu and click on *Permissions*. This
shows you a table of roles defined in the portal. Use the check boxes to grant
certain permissions to different roles. Click *Submit* after you have made your
selections. 

Beyond this, specific permissions are generally defined for specific
applications. For example, the message boards portlet contains a *Ban User*
permission. This makes no sense in the context of another portlet, say, the
blogs portlet. We'll go over permissions for specific applications in the
sections for those applications. For now, let's move on to sharing
applications.

### Communication [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-communication-0)

Liferay implements several communication mechanisms across portlets including
those specified by the JSR-286 standard: public render parameters and events.
Public render parameters are easy to use and can be quite powerful. Some
Liferay portlets provide a configuration UI to help you get the most out of
this communication mechanism. To access this UI, open your portlet's
configuration window by clicking on the wrench icon and selecting
*Configuration*. Then click on the *Communication* tab. 

![Figure 7.11: You can configure portlets to communicate with each other using
public render parameters.](../../images/portlet-communication-tab.png)

The screenshot above is for the Wiki portlet, which has six public render
parameters: categoryId, nodeId, nodeName, resetCur, tag, title. For each of
these parameters, you can configure the portlet to ignore the values coming
from other portlets to read the value from another parameter.

Why might it be useful to ignore the values for certain parameters that come
from other portlets? Consider a common use case for the Wiki portlet. The Wiki
portlet is often used along with the Tags Navigation portlet so that when a
user clicks on a tag of the latter, the Wiki portlet shows a list of pages with
that tag. In some cases, an administrator may want the Wiki portlet to always
show the front page independently of any tag navigation done through other
portlets. This can be achieved by checking the *Ignore* checkbox so that the
values of the parameter coming from those other portlets are ignored.

Reading the value of a parameter from another portlet is an advanced but very
powerful option that allows portlets to communicate with each other even if
their developers didn't intend them to. For example, imagine that the Wiki
portlet is being used to publish information about certain countries. Imagine
further that there's another portlet that allows browsing countries for
administrative reasons. The second portlet has a public render parameter called
*country* with the name of the country. We'd like the Wiki to show the
information from the country that's selected in the administration portlet.
This can be achieved by setting the value of the title parameter of the Wiki
portlet to be read from the country parameter of the administration portlet.
Cool, isn't it?

### Sharing [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-sharing-0)

The web was once thought of as a number of islands of applications in a vast
universe of "cyberspace." Many web sites attempted to make their island the
biggest. Some succeeded to a large extent and some failed. More recently, the
concept of the web as an application itself has taken hold, and so widgets have
become very popular nowadays. This concept is part of the "Web 2.0" concept and
is very much enabled by widgets. What is a widget? A widget is a small piece of
code which provides a piece of functionality, can be included on any web site,
but does not necessarily have to be hosted by that web site. If you have ever
embedded a YouTube video on your own web site so that users could watch a video
without actually having to visit [http://youtube.com](http://youtube.com/),
then you've already used a widget.

Liferay supports serving its portlets as widgets. You can embed a particular
instance of a portlet running on your site into another site, such as Facebook.
This opens up a whole new avenue of exposure to your web site that you would
not have had otherwise. In fact, this is how all those Facebook games work.

![Figure 7.12: Sharing Tab of the Portlet Configuration Dialog
Box](../../images/liferay-collaboration-portlet-configuration-sharing.png)

To share one of your portlets as a widget, open the *Configuration* dialog box
from the portlet's title bar and select the *Sharing* tab. There are five
subtabs under sharing: Any Web Site, Facebook, Google Gadget, Netvibes, and
Friends.

#### Any Web Site [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-any-web-site-0)

Copy and paste the provided snippet of JavaScript code into the web site to
which you want to add the portlet as a widget. That's all you need to do. When
a user loads the page on the other web site, the code will pull the relevant
portlet from your site and display it.

#### Facebook [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-facebook-0)

You can add any Liferay portlet as an application on Facebook. To do this, you
must first get a developer key. A link for doing this is provided to you in the
Facebook tab. You'll have to create the application on Facebook and get the key
and canvas page URL from Facebook. Once you've done this, you can copy and
paste their values into the Facebook tab. Your portlet will now be available on
Facebook as a Facebook application.

![Figure 7.13: Liferay's Forums on
Facebook](../../images/05-liferay-forum-facebook.png)

Incidentally, this makes Liferay a fantastic platform upon which to build
applications for Facebook. See the *Liferay Developer's Guide* or [*Liferay in
Action*](http://manning.com/sezov) for more details. 

#### OpenSocial Gadget [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-opensocial-gadget-0)

OpenSocial comprises a container and a set of APIs for social networking and
other web applications. iGoogle is a service provided by Google that lets users
create a customizable page and add *Gadgets* to that page. Liferay can serve up
portlets to be used as Open Social Gadgets on iGoogle or other
OpenSocial-compatible pages.

To serve a Liferay portlet on iGoogle, check the box labeled *Allow users to
add [portlet-name] to iGoogle*. Then copy and paste the URL provided into
Google's *Add a feed or gadget* feature on the iGoogle configuration page. Your
Liferay portal instance will serve that portlet directly onto your iGoogle
page. The URL provided is unique to the specific instance of the portlet, so
you could serve multiple instances of the same portlet as different Google
Gadgets.

You could use this feature to allow users to view what's happening on your
portal at a glance, using asset publishers or custom RSS feeds. You could also
use Liferay's API to build your own portlet and provide the URL for users to
place on their iGoogle pages.

#### Netvibes [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-netvibes-0)

Netvibes offers a similar service to iGoogle--users can log in, create their
own personal portal, called a *dashboard*, and add customizable widgets to the
dashboard that they create. To set up Netvibes support for a particular
portlet, check the *Allow users to add [portlet-name] to Netvibes pages* box.
You can then use the provided URL to create a custom Netvibes widget based on
the instance of the portlet that you're using.

#### Friends [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-friends-0)

The final sub-tab of the *Sharing* tab is called *Friends*. This tab has a
single check box that allows you to give your friends permission to add the
application as a widget to another web site. This could be particularly useful
for your blog or calendar if you wish to share them.

Now that we've seen all the common options available in Liferay's portlet
applications, we can move on to specific applications, starting with blogs.

## Expressing yourself using Blogs [](id=blo-4)

The word *Blog* is an apostrophe-less contraction of the two words *web* and
*log*. Blogs were first popularized by web sites such as Slashdot
([http://slashdot.org](http://slashdot.org)) which have the format of a running
list of entries to which users could attach comments. Over time, more and more
sites such as Digg, del.icio.us, and Newsvine adopted the format, empowering
users to share their opinions and generating lively discussions.

Over the course of time, blogging sites and applications began to appear, such
as blogger.com, blogspot.com. TypePad, WordPress, and Web Roller. These
applications allow *individuals* to run their own web sites in the same format:
a running list of short articles to which readers who are registered with the
site can attach threaded comments. People who run a blog are called *bloggers*,
and sometimes they build a whole community of readers who are interested in
their blog posts. Anyone can have a blog, in fact, there are several famous
people who run their own blogs. It gives people an outlet for self-expression
that they would not otherwise have, and the ubiquity and wide reach of the
Internet ensures that if you have something important and interesting to say,
somebody will read it.

![Figure 7.14: Slashdot, one of the first blogs on the
Internet](../../images/05-slashdot.jpg)

Liferay Portal has a Blogs portlet which allows you to provide a blogging
service to users of your web site. In fact, Liferay extensively uses the Blogs
portlet on [http://www.liferay.com](http://www.liferay.com) to provide
employees with blogs of their own. In addition to the Blogs portlet, there's
also a Blogs Aggregator portlet which can take entries from multiple users'
blogs and put them all in one larger list. We will go over how to use both of
these portlets to create a blogging site for your users.

### The Blogs Portlet [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-the-blogs-portlet-0)

The Blogs portlet is available from the *Collaboration* section of the *Add
&rarr; More* menu. Notice that it is an instanceable portlet, meaning that it
supports scopes. This allows you to use the Blogs portlet to create a shared
blog to build a site like Slashdot or to create multiple personal blogs to
build a site like [http://blogger.com](http://blogger.com). What's the
difference? Adding the Blogs portlet to a site page creates a shared blog for
members of the site that the page belongs to. Adding the Blogs portlet to a
user's personal site creates a blog just for that user. The Blogs portlet works
the same way in both cases. And of course, you can change the Blog portlet's
scope to have different blogs on different pages in the same site.

![Figure 7.15: Initial View of the Blogs
Portlet](../../images/05-initial-view-blogs-portlet.jpg)

By default, the Blogs portlet displays the latest entry in its entirety. When
you first add the portlet to a page, it has no entries, so the portlet is
empty. There are several display options to let you configure it to look the
way you want it to look. Before we start adding entries, let's configure the
portlet so that it displays entries the way you want them.

#### Configuring the Blogs Portlet [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-configuring-the-blogs-portlet-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-configuring-the-blogs-portlet-0)

The Blogs portlet is easy to configure. Click on the *Menu* icon in the
portlet's title bar and select *Configuration*. Beneath the Setup tab, there is
another row of options.

**Email From:** defines the *From* field in the email messages that users
receive from the Blogs portlet.

**Entry Added Email:** defines a subject and body for the emails sent out when
a new Blog entry has been added.

**Entry Updated Email:** defines a subject and body for the emails sent out
when a new Blog entry has been updated.

**Display Settings:** changes various display options for the Blogs portlet. To
choose the right settings, you should think about the best way to display your
entries as well as how you want users to interact with bloggers.

![Figure 7.16: Blogs Configuration](../../images/05-blogs-configuration.png)

*Maximum Items to Display:* choose the total number of blog entries to display
on the initial page. You can select up to one hundred to be displayed.

*Display Style:* choose between full Content, abstract, or just the title.
Setting this to Abstract shows the abstract, or if there isn't one, only the
first 30 words of your blog entries, with a Read More link at the bottom of
each that expands to the whole entry.

*Enable Flags:* flag content as inappropriate and send an email to the
administrators.

*Enable Related Assets:* select related content from other portlets to pull
into their blog entry for readers to view.

![Figure 7.17: Related Assets](../../images/05-related-assets.png)

*Enable Ratings:* lets readers rate your blog entries from one to five stars.

*Enable Comments:* lets readers comment on your blog entries.

*Enable Comment Ratings:* lets readers rate the comments which are posted to
your blog entries.

*Enable Social Bookmarks:* lets users tweet, Facebook like, or +1 (Google Plus)
about blog posts.

*Maximum Items to Display:* determine how many blog entries will be displayed
at once. The default is set to twenty.

*Display Style:* select a simple, vertical, or horizontal display style for
your blog posts.

*Display Position:* choose a top or a bottom position for your blog posts.

**RSS:** choose how blogs are displayed to RSS readers. Here, you can choose
how you want your blog entries to be published as feeds to readers and outside
web sites.

*Maximum Items to Display:* choose the total number of RSS feeds to display on
the initial page. You can choose up to one hundred to be displayed.

*Display Style:* choose between full content, abstract, and title. These
options work just like the ones above for blog entries.

*Format:* choose which format you want to deliver your blogs: RSS 1.0, RSS 2.0,
or Atom 1.0.

Now that you have the Blogs portlet looking the way you want it, you'll want to
review permissions for it--especially if you're working on a shared blog. 

#### Permissions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-permissions-1)

If you have a personal blog, the default permissions should work well for you.
If you have a shared blog, you may want to modify the permissions on the blog.
The default settings make it so only the owner of the site to which the portlet
has been added is able to add entries. This, of course, is great if the Blogs
portlet has been added to a user's personal pages, but doesn't work so well for
a shared blog. But don't worry: it's easy to share a blog with multiple users.

First, create a role for your bloggers and add them to the role (roles are
covered in chapter 12 of Part 2). Next, click the *Permissions* button on the
Blogs portlet. A list of both portal and site roles is displayed, and currently
only the owner is checked. Check off any other role or team that should have
the ability to add blog entries, and then click *Save*. Once this is done,
users in the roles or teams that you selected are able to post to the shared
blog. 

Now that everyone's able to post, let's look at how posts work. 

#### Adding Blog Entries [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-adding-blog-entries-0)

Now you're ready to begin adding blog entries. Click the *Add Blog Entry*
button. The following data entry screen appears: 

![Figure 7.18: Adding a Blog Entry](../../images/05-new-blog-entry.png)

There isn't much difference between this screen and any other data entry screen
within Liferay Portal. You get a title, a way of scheduling when the entry is
to appear, and a rich editor that allows you to format your entry the way you
want, complete with embedded images, videos, and the like. Note also that as
you type, the entry is automatically saved as a draft at periodic intervals.
This gives you peace of mind in using the portlet from within your browser,
since you won't lose your entry in the event of a browser crash or network
interruption. You can also tag your entries using the same tagging mechanism
found everywhere else in the portal.

The Blogs portlet also supports trackbacks and pingbacks. Trackbacks are
special links that let you notify another site that you linked to them. For
example, if you wanted to write an entry in your blog and reference some other
site's entry, you might put the URL to the other entry in the *Trackbacks to
Send* field. If you have multiple URLs you want to send trackbacks to, separate
them with spaces. 

If you want others who link to your blog to let you know about the link via
trackbacks, leave the *Allow Trackbacks* box checked. This generates a URL that
is displayed with your blog entry. Others who want to link to your entry can
use this URL for the link, to send trackbacks to your blog.

Note that trackbacks only work when the protocol is supported by both the
linker and the linkee. A newer way to support similar link notification
functionality is *pingbacks*. Pingbacks are XML-RPC requests that are similar
to trackbacks except they're automatically sent when you link to another site.
They're easier to use because you don't have to do anything extra: if you link
to another site in your blog entry, Liferay sends a pingback to the other site
to notify that site that you linked to it. Similarly, if someone links to your
blog entry, Liferay can receive a pingback from that person's site and record
the link.

You can enter a description of your post beneath the Abstract heading, and this
can be used by the Abstract display style. Below this is the Categorization
heading, where you can attach tags and/or categories to your blog entry. You
should definitely consider doing this: it improves search results for blog
entries, and it gives you more navigation options that you can pass on to your
users. For example, you can add the Tags Navigation portlet to another column
on your blogs page, allowing users to browse blog entries by tag. 

Below this is the Related Assets heading. If there's some other content in the
portal that's related to your blog, you can choose it here. For example, you
might want to write a blog entry talking about a particular discussion that
happened on the forums. To link those two assets together, select the forum
thread under Related Assets. 

Once you've finished your blog entry, click *Publish*. You'll go back to the
list of entries, and now your entry is displayed. Here is what it looks like
when the display style is set to *Full Content* and the number of entries is
set to ten:

![Figure 7.19: First Blog Entry
Added](../../images/05-first-blog-entry-added.png)

You can see that in the summary view, you don't see the trackback/pingback
link, and you only see the number of comments that have been added. If you were
to click the *Read More* link, you would see the entirety of the article, all
the comments in a threaded view, and the trackback/pingback link which others
can use to link back to your blog entry.

The full view of the blog entry also contains links to share blog entries on
social networks, such as Twitter, Facebook, and Google Plus. This gives your
readers an easy way to share blog entries with friends, potentially driving
further traffic to your site. As you can see, the Blogs portlet is a
full-featured blogging application that gives you and your users the ability to
enter the blogosphere with an application that supports anything a blogger
needs.

Of course, Liferay is a portal, and as a portal, it excels at aggregating
information from multiple places. For that reason, it also includes the Blogs
Aggregator portlet so that you can "bubble up" blog entries from multiple users
and highlight them on your site. Let's look next at how that works. 

### Aggregating Blog Entries [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-aggregating-blog-entries-0)

You can set up a whole web site devoted just to blogging if you wish. The Blogs
Aggregator portlet allows you to publish entries from multiple bloggers on one
page, giving further visibility to blog entries. This portlet is also very
straightforward to set up. You can add it to a page from the Collaboration
category in the Dockbar's *Add &rarr; More* menu.

If you click *Configuration* from the menu button in the title bar of the
portlet, the Blogs Aggregator's configuration page appears. From here, you can
set several configuration options.

![Figure 7.20: Blogs Aggregator
Configuration](../../images/05-blogs-aggregator-configuration.png)

**Selection Method:** select Users or Scope here. If you select Users, the
Blogs Aggregator aggregates the entries of every blogger on your system. If you
want to refine the aggregation, you can select an organization by which to
filter the users. If you select Scope, the Blogs Aggregator contains only
entries of users who are in the current scope. This limits the entries to
members of the site where the Blogs Aggregator portlet resides.

**Organization:** select which organization's blogs you want to aggregate.

**Display Style:** select from several different styles for displaying blog
entries: title, abstract, body, image, or quote.

**Maximum Items to Display:** select maximum number of entries the portlet
displays.

**Enable RSS Subscription:** creates an RSS feed out of the aggregated entries.
This lets users subscribe to an aggregate feed of all your bloggers. 

**Show Tags:** for each entry, displays all the tags associated with the blogs.

When you've finished setting the options in the portlet, click *Save*. Then
close the dialog box. You'll notice the Blogs Aggregator looks very much like
the Blogs portlet, except that the entries come from more than one author. This
makes it nice and familiar for your users to navigate. 

### The Blogs Admininistrator Portlet [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-the-blogs-admininistrator-portlet-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-the-blogs-admininistrator-portlet-0)

In the Control Panel there's a portlet for managing your site's blog entries.
Most of the time, the Blogs portlet is the only tool you'll need to manage your
blog entries. If, however, you need to massively delete blog entries, the blogs
administrator portlet is the perfect tool for you. 

![Figure 7.21: The Blogs Administrator portlet lets you delete large sets of
blog entries.](../../images/04-blogs-administrator.png)

Note that it's only for batch processing of blog entries; for the full set of
tools for managing blog entries, your best bet is to use the Blogs portlet.  

We've already talked a little bit about connecting content across the portal by
using Related Assets; now let's take a look at the Related Assets portlet.

## Organizing and sharing events with the Calendar [](id=calend-4)

Liferay's Calendar portlet is a complete calendaring solution. You can schedule
any number of events of different types, receive alarms via email or text
message, import and export your calendar, and much more. Additionally, you can
import and export the calendar to and from the popular iCalendar format for use
in other applications.

![Figure 7.22: The Liferay Calendar
Portlet](../../images/05-calendar-portlet.png)

In a similar way to the Blogs portlet, you can use the Calendar portlet as a
shared calendar on a web site or as a personal calendar -- or both. Let's look
at how to configure it. 

### Configuring the Calendar Portlet [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-configuring-the-calendar-portlet-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-configuring-the-calendar-portlet-0)

Open the *Configuration* dialog box from the menu in the portlet's title bar.
The Setup tab allows you to configure three different options in subtabs:
*Email From*, *Event Reminder Email*, and *Display Settings*.

**Email From:** set the *Name* and *Email Address* system generated emails come
from. The address that you enter in the Email Address field must be properly
formatted, but it doesn't need to be an address that actually exists. 

**Event Reminder Email:** customize the email message the Calendar sends for
event reminders. It contains the same rich text editor that you see everywhere
else in Liferay, and this allows you to HTML format the message for easy
recognition. As with other Liferay email notifications, there are several
variables which allow you to insert runtime values into the message, and these
are listed underneath the text editor so that you can use them in the
appropriate place in your template. For example, you might want the event start
date and time and the event title included in the email reminder that you
receive. Use the variables to insert that information in the appropriate place. 

**Display Settings:** customize how the portlet shows itself to the user. There
are several settings here: 

- *Default Tab:* select which tab of the calendar portlet is displayed to the
  user by default. 

- *Summary Tab:* select whether it has a horizontal or vertical layout. You can
  also use checkboxes to choose whether or not the calendar portlet shows a
mini month, shows today's events, or enables related assets, comments, or
ratings. 

Now that you've successfully set up your calendar, let's look at how to use it. 

### Using the Calendar Portlet [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-using-the-calendar-portlet-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-using-the-calendar-portlet-0)

The Calendar portlet inherits its interface from the rest of Liferay's portlet
library, so you should find shared features in the same place that you find
them in other Liferay portlets.

To get started, you may want to click the *Permissions* button. Here you'll
find an interface that should be becoming familiar: a list of roles with check
boxes. For the Calendar, these denote whether the role has the *Add Event* or
the *Export All Events* permission. By default, only the owner has permission
to do these things, which means that the Calendar portlet is set up for
personal use. The reason for this is that out of the box, Liferay puts a
Calendar portlet on all users' private pages. If you want to use the Calendar
as a shared calendar, you'll need to make an additional configuration. 

First, create a portal or site role. Then add the users responsible for
maintaining the calendar to this role. This process is described in chapter 12.
You can add multiple roles if you like. Once you have the role or roles set up,
come back to the Calendar portlet and click the *Permissions* button. Check the
boxes next to the roles that should have access to one or both of the functions
*Add Event* and *Export All Events*. Then click *Submit*.

Now you are ready to begin using your calendar. Click the *Add Event* button. A
form appears that allows you to fill out all the information for your event.

**Start Date/Time:** enter a date and time for the event.

**Duration:** specify how long the event will last.

**All Day Event:** disassociate time from the event and make it last all day.

**Time Zone Sensitive:** make sure that the portal keeps track of the event
regardless of time zone.

**Title:** provide a title for the event.

**Description:** describe your event.

**Location:** specify the physical location of the event.

**Type:** select a pre-configured event type. You can change these in the
`portal-ext.properties` file.

**Permissions:** manage who can view and edit the event.

**Categorizations:** tag and categorize the event.

**Related Assets:** attach a piece of content from another portlet to the
event.

**Repeat:** select the schedule (daily, weekly, monthly. etc.) for repeatable
events.

**End Date:** enter the end date for events that repeat on a schedule but have
a specified last meeting.

**Reminders:** select whether to send a reminder, how long before the event to
send it, and through what medium (email, SMS text message, or instant message)
to send it. Note that this feature is integrated with users' profiles on the
portal, so users need their information filled out and current in order to
receive notifications.

When you have finished adding your event, click *Save*. You can view calendar
events by day, week, month, year, or in a simple list. 

As you can see, the Calendar portlet is easy to use and convenient for users of
the portal. Next, let's look at one of the most widely used applications
provided by Liferay: its message boards.

## Discuss, ask and answer using the Message Boards [](id=message-boar-4)

Liferay's Message Boards portlet is a state of the art forum application
similar to many forums in which you may have participated. The difference, of
course, is that Liferay's message boards can inherit the abilities of the
Liferay development platform to provide an integrated experience that others
cannot match.

There are countless web sites out there where it is clearly evident that there
is no link whatsoever between the main site and the message boards. In some
cases, users are even required to register twice: once for the main site and
once for the message boards. Sometimes it is three times: for the site, for the
message boards, and for the shopping cart. By providing a message boards
portlet along with all of the other applications, Liferay provides a unique,
integrated approach to building web sites. You can concentrate on building your
site while Liferay does the integration work for you.

The Message Boards portlet has a lot of configuration options, but they are
straightforward to use and are the reason why this portlet is a full-featured
forum application for your web site. To get started, add a Message Boards
portlet to your site. Once it is added, click the *Menu* icon in the portlet's
title bar and click *Configuration*. There are two rows of tabs. The first tab
in the top row is titled *Setup*. This is where you can configure the
application the way you want it to behave on your site.

### General [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-general-0)

The first tab beneath *Setup* is labeled *General*. Here, you can enable
anonymous posting, subscribe by default, flags, ratings, and thread as question
by default. You can also choose whether you want the message format to be
BBcode or HTML. Anonymous posting, subscribe by default, flags, and ratings are
selected by default and the default message format is BBcode. 

Anonymous posting lets those without an account on the system post messages to
your message boards. You may or may not want to do this, depending on the type
of community you are building. Allowing anonymous posting opens your site to
anyone who might want to spam your forums with unwanted or off topic
advertising messages. For this reason, most of those who implement message
boards turn anonymous posting off by unchecking this box.

The subscribe by default option automatically subscribes users to threads they
participate in. The thread as question by default automatically checks the mark
as question box in the new thread window. Threads marked as questions display
the flag "waiting for an answer." Subsequent replies to the original message
can be marked as an answer.

Flags allow your users to flag content which they consider to be objectionable.
If you are allowing anonymous posting, you might use flags in combination with
it if you have someone administering your message boards on a day-to-day basis.
That way, any unwanted messages can be flagged by your community, and you can
review those flagged messages and take whatever action is necessary. Using
flags is also a good practice even if you're not allowing anonymous posting.

Ratings enable your users to give certain posts a score. This score is used by
Liferay Portal's social equity system to rank your site members by how helpful
their contributions are. You can read more about social equity later in this
chapter and in chapter 9.

### Email From [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-email-from-0)

This tab allows you to configure the email address that messages from the
Message Boards portlet come from. By default, the name is `Joe Bloggs` and the
email address is `test@liferay.com`.

### Message Added Email [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-message-added-email-0)

This tab allows you to customize the email message that users receive when a
message is added to a topic to which they are subscribed.

**Enabled:** allows you to turn on the automatic emails to subscribed users.
Uncheck the box to disable the message added emails.

**Subject Prefix:** lets you choose a prefix to be prepended to the subject
line of the email. This is usually done so that users can set up message
filters to filter the notifications to a specific folder in their email
clients.

**Body:** allows you to write some content that should appear in the body of
the email.

**Signature:** lets you add some content to appear as the signature of the
email.

Below the fields is a section called *Definition of Terms* which defines
certain variables which you can use in the fields above to customize the email
message. Some of these variables are for the message board category name, the
site name, and more.

### Message Updated Email [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-message-updated-email-0)

The Message Updated Email tab is identical to the Message Added Email tab,
except it defines the email message that users receive whenever a topic is
updated.

### Thread Priorities [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-thread-priorities-0)

You can define custom priorities for message threads on this tab. These allow
administrators to tag certain threads with certain priorities in order to
highlight them for users. By default, three priorities are defined: Urgent,
Sticky, and Announcement. To define a thread priority, enter its name, a URL to
the image icon that represents it, and a priority number which denotes the
order in which that priority should appear.

There is also a field on this form that allows you to select a localized
language for your priorities. If you need to do this, you can select the
language from the selection box.

### User Ranks [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-user-ranks-0)

On this tab, users can be ranked according to the number of messages they have
posted. You can set up custom ranks here. Defaults have been provided for you,
going from zero messages all the way up to one thousand.

In addition to ranks, you can also select who is a "moderator"? by what roles
are held. Defaults are there for you which show you how to do this.

    Moderator=site-role:Message Boards Administrator

    Moderator=organization:Message Boards Administrator

    Moderator=organization-role:Message Boards Administrator

    Moderator=regular-role:Message Boards Administrator

    Moderator=user-group:Message Boards Administrator

As you can see, all you need to do is set the rank, the collection type, and
the name of the type. In the example above, anyone who has a site role, an
organization role, a regular role, or is in a user group called *Message Boards
Administrator*, or anyone who is the organization owner gets the moderator
rank.

As with thread priorities, on this tab you can define whether your ranks are
localized in a particular language.

### RSS [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-rss-0)

Message board threads can be published as RSS feeds. This tab allows you to
define how the feeds are generated.

**Maximum Items to Display:** lets you select the number of items to display in
the feed.

**Display Style:** lets you select the style. You can publish the full content,
an abstract, or just the title of a thread.

**Format:** allows you to choose the format: RSS 1.0, RSS 2.0, or Atom 1.0.

### Permissions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-permissions-2)

The default page that the Message Boards portlet displays has three buttons on
it. Click the one labeled *Permissions*. This allows you to define which roles
have the ability to add a category of threads or to ban abusive users from the
message boards. Select the roles and permissions you want to configure and then
click *Submit*.

### Adding Categories and Mailing Lists [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-adding-categories-and-mailing-lists-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-adding-categories-and-mailing-lists-0)

You are now ready to add categories to your message boards. Click the *Add
Category* button. You may merge with a Parent Category by enabling the *Merge
with Parent Category* check box and clicking the *Select* button. Enter a name
for the category and a description of the category.

Starting with Liferay 6.1, categories can have different display styles. The
available categories must be set in portal property
`message.boards.category.display.styles` and the default category in
`message.boards.category.display.styles.default`. When creating a new category,
you can select the display style you like for that category. By default,
Liferay provides two predefined display styles, although many more can be
easily added:

**Default:** classic display style for general purpose and discussions.

**Question:** designed for discussions in a format of questions and answers.

![Figure 7.23: Editing a Message Boards
Category](../../images/05-editing-message-board-category.png)

At the bottom of the form is a check box that allows you to enable the mailing
list function.

The mailing list function works in concert with the message notification
emails. If a user subscribes to a message board category, he or she will get
emails when someone posts messages to that category. Enabling the mailing list
function allows those users to simply reply to the notification messages in
their email clients, and those replies will be posted to the thread
automatically.

To enable this functionality, you will need a mail account for the category.
Once you click the check box, a number of other options will appear.

**Email Address:** lets you enter the email address of the account that will
receive the messages.

Next, there are two sections: *Incoming* and *Outgoing*. These define the mail
settings for receiving mail and for sending mail. The Incoming tab has the
following options:

**Protocol:** lets you select POP or IMAP.

**Server Name:** lets you enter the host name of the mail server you are using.

**Server Port:** allows you to specify the port on which your mail service is
running.

**Use a Secure Network Connection:** lets you use an encrypted connection if
your server supports it.

**User Name:** lets you enter the login name on the mail server.

**Password:** lets you enter the password for the account on the server.

**Read Interval (Minutes):** allows you to specify how often Liferay will poll
the server looking for new messages to post.

The Outgoing section has the following options:

**Email Address:** lets you enter the email address that messages from this
category should come from. If you want your users to be able to reply to the
categories using email, this should be the same address configured on the
*Incoming* tab.

**Use Custom Outgoing Server:** allows you to use a different mail server than
the one that is configured for the portal. If you check this box, more options
appear.

**Server Name:** lets you enter the host name of the SMTP mail server you are
using.

**Server Port:** allows you to specify the port on which your mail service is
running.

**Use a Secure Network Connection:** allows you to use an encrypted connection
if your server supports it.

**User Name:** lets you enter the login name on the mail server.

**Password:** lets you enter the password for the account on the mail server.

When finished adding your category, click *Save*. Add as many categories to
your message boards as you wish.

Note that categories can have subcategories. You can add a number of top-level
categories and then click on each one and add categories under that, to an
unlimited level. For usability reasons, you don't want to nest your categories
too deep, or your users will have trouble finding them. You can always add more
categories as your message boards grow.

### Using the Message Boards [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-using-the-message-boards-0)

Upon seeing Liferay's Message Boards portlet, your users will immediately
recognize that the interface is similar to many other implementations they've
seen before. Message boards are nothing new to the Internet, and many people
have been using them for quite a long time. For that reason, Liferay's message
boards will seem very familiar to your users.

Threads can be viewed in many ways. At the top of the portlet is a set of tabs:
*Recent posts*, *My Posts*, *My Subscriptions*, and for administrative users,
*Statistics* and *Banned Users*. The Recent Posts tab shows all posts from all
categories by date, so you can keep up on all the most recent discussions in
the message boards. The My Posts tab shows all of the posts for the user that
is currently logged in. This is a convenient way to get back to a previous
conversation in order to retrieve some pertinent information. The My
Subscriptions tab allows a user to manage thread subscriptions. If you lose
interest in a particular topic, you may want to visit this tab and unsubscribe
from a thread.

For administrators, the Statistics tab shows the number of categories, the
number of posts, and the number of participants in your message boards. It also
has a list of who the top posters to your message boards are. The Banned Users
tab shows all of the users who have been banned from posting on the message
boards.

### Posting New Threads [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-posting-new-threads-0)

To post a new thread simply select the *Post New Thread* button. You will see a
message editing form. The body field on this form is different from that of the
other portlets in Liferay. The reason for this is to support *BBCode*, which is
a standard form of markup used in many message board products. Before BBCode
was invented, many message board products would allow users to enter HTML to
format their messages. This, however, enabled attackers to insert malicious
code into the message board. BBCode was invented to provide users a way of
formatting their messages without allowing them to enter HTML. Similarly,
Liferay supports BBCode in the message boards portlet because the other
editor--which is used for the Content Management System, the Blogs portlet, and
other portlets--produces HTML. This is appropriate for those other portlets, as
they are only used by privileged users, but it is not appropriate for the
message boards. Besides this, many users of message boards are familiar with
BBCode and are used to it, and the editor that is provided for Liferay's
Message Boards portlet makes it very easy to use.

![Figure 7.24: Editing a Message Boards
Post](../../images/05-editing-message-board-post.png)

The message boards editor is quite rich. It supports bold, italicized,
underlined, and crossed-out text, links, images, colors, lists, tables,
alignments, quotation blocks, code blocks, different fonts and font sizes, and
more. There are even a bunch of smiley faces that you can use.

![Figure 7.25: Emoticons Available in the
Editor](../../images/05-emoticons.png)

Users who have Moderator access to the board can modify the priority of
messages. You can also use the editor to quote from messages that you are
replying to, to insert emoticons, to add preformatted text, and more. Messages
that are posted to the message boards are shown by default in a threaded view
so that replies are attached to the proper parent message. This makes it easy
to follow along with conversations.

When viewing a message board thread, users are given several options. At the
top right of the thread are three icons, allowing users to view threads in a
flat view, in a tree view, or in a combination view. A flat view shows all of
the messages in the order in which they are posted. A tree view shows all of
the messages in a threaded view, so that replies are next to the messages they
are replying to. A combination view shows the threads at the top as subjects
only, with the flat view underneath.

When viewing a thread, users can click links allowing them to post a new
thread, subscribe to the thread they are viewing, or if they have
administrative access, lock a thread or move a thread to another category.
Subscribing to a thread causes Liferay to send the user an email whenever a new
message is posted to the thread. If you have enabled the mailing list feature
for the category in which the thread resides, users can simply reply to these
messages in order to post back to the thread, without having to visit your
site.

The Message Boards portlet is also highly integrated with Liferay's user
management features. Posts on the message board show users' pictures if they
have uploaded one for themselves, as well as the dates that users created an ID
on your site.

### Message Board Administrative Functions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-message-board-administrative-functions-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-message-board-administrative-functions-0)

The Message Boards portlet provides for the day to day administration of the
message threads. You may wish to separate this function out by a role, and then
delegate that role to one or more of your users. That would free you up to
concentrate on other areas of your web site. To do this, you can create a role
called Message Board Administrators. This role can be scoped by the portal, an
organization, or a site. If you have a portal scoped role, members of this role
will be able to administer any Message Boards portlet in the portal. If it is
an organization or site scoped role, members of this role will be able to
administer a Message Boards portlet in only the organization or site which
assigned the role to them.

Go to the Control Panel and create this role. Once it is created, click
*Actions &rarr; Define Permissions*. Click the *Add Permissions* dropdown list.
Browse the list until you find the Message Boards portlet under the Site
Content section and then click on it. You will then see a screen which allows
you to configure the various permissions on the portlet.

![Figure 7.26: Defining Permissions for the Message Board Administrators
Role](../../images/05-defining-permissions-message-board-admin-role.png)

Select the permissions you would like message board administrators to have and
then click *Save*. You can add users to this role and they will inherit the
permissions. Message Board administrators can perform all of the functions we
have already presented, including creating and deleting categories and posting
threads. In addition to these, a number of other functions are available.

#### Moving Threads [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-moving-threads-0)

Many times a user will post a thread in the wrong category. Administrators may
in this case want to move a thread to the proper category. This is very easy to
do. You can select the *Actions* menu to the right of the thread and choose
*Move Thread*. Or, if you are already viewing the thread and you have
administrative access, there is a link at the top of the thread labeled *Move
Thread*. Click this link. You will be presented with a simple form which allows
you to select a category to which to move the thread and a check box which
allows you to post a message explaining why the thread was moved. This message
will be posted as a reply to the thread you are moving. When finished, click
the *Move Thread* button and the thread will be moved.

#### Deleting Threads [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-deleting-threads-0)

Users with administrative access to the message boards can delete threads.
Sometimes users begin discussing topics that are inappropriate or that reveal
confidential information. In this case, you can simply delete the thread from
the message boards. This is easy to do. First, view the list of threads. Next
to every thread is an *Actions* button. Click *Actions &rarr; Delete* to delete
the thread. This does not prevent users from re-posting the information, so you
may need to be vigilant in deleting threads or consider the next option.

#### Banning Users [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-banning-users-0)

Unfortunately, sometimes certain users become abusive. If you wind up with a
user like this, you can certainly make attempts to warn him or her that the
behavior he or she is displaying is unacceptable. If this does not work, you
can ban the user from posting on the message boards.

Again, this is very easy to do. Find any post which was written by the abusive
user. Underneath the user's name/profile picture is a link called *Ban this
User*. Click this link to ban the user from the message boards.

If after taking this action the user apologizes and agrees to stop his or her
abusive behavior, you can choose to reinstate the user. To do this, click the
*Banned Users* tab at the top of the Message Boards portlet. This will show a
list of all banned users. Find the user in the list and select *Unban this
User*.

#### Splitting Threads [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-splitting-threads-0)

Sometimes a thread will go on for a while and the discussion completely changes
into something else. In this case, you can split the thread where the
discussion diverges and create a whole new thread for the new topic.
Administrative users will see a *Split Thread* link on each post. To split the
thread, click the link. You will be brought to a form which allows you to add
an explanation post to the split thread. Click *Ok* to split the thread.

#### Editing Posts [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-editing-posts-0)

Administrative users can edit anyone's posts, not just their own. Sometimes
users will post links to copyrighted material or unsuitable pictures. You can
edit these posts, which allows you to redact information that should not be
posted or to censor profanity that is not allowed on your message boards.

#### Permissions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-permissions-3)

Permissions can be set not only on threads, but also on individual posts. You
can choose to limit a particular conversation or a post to only a select group
of people. To do this, click the *Permissions* link on the post and then select
among the *Delete, Permissions, Subscribe, Update, and View* permissions for
the particular role to which you want to grant particular access. This function
can be used, for example, to allow some privileged users to post on a certain
thread, while others are only allowed to view it. Other combinations of the
above permissions are also possible. Next, let's discuss Liferay's Wiki
portlet.

## Working together with the Wiki [](id=wik-4)

Liferay's Wiki portlet, like the Message Boards portlet, is a full-featured
wiki application which has all of the features you would expect in a state of
the art wiki. Again, though, it has the benefit of being able to take advantage
of all of the features of the Liferay platform. As such, it is completely
integrated with Liferay's user management, tagging, and security features.

So, what is a wiki? Basically, a wiki is an application which allows users to
collaboratively build a repository of information. There are, of course, many
implementations of this idea, the most famous of which is Wikipedia. Wikipedia
is a full online encyclopedia developed collaboratively by users from all over
the world, using a wiki. Another example would be Liferay's wiki, which is used
for collaborative documentation of the Community Edition of Liferay Portal.

A wiki application allows users to create and edit documents and link them to
each other. To accomplish this, a special form of markup is used which is
sometimes called wikitext. Unfortunately, the proliferation of many different
wiki applications resulted in slightly different syntax for wikitext in the
various products, as each new wiki tried to focus on new features that other
wikis did not have. For that reason, a project called WikiCreole was started.
This project resulted in the release of WikiCreole 1.0 in 2007, which is an
attempt to define a standard wiki markup that all wikis can support.

Rather than define another wikitext syntax, Liferay's Wiki portlet supports
WikiCreole as its syntax. This syntax is a best-of-breed wiki syntax and should
be familiar to users of other wikis. The portlet provides a handy cheat sheet
for the syntax on the page editing form, with a link to the full documentation
if you wish to use some of WikiCreole's advanced features.

### Getting Started with the Liferay Wiki [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-getting-started-with-the-liferay-wiki-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-getting-started-with-the-liferay-wiki-0)

The Wiki portlet works just like the other portlets developed by Liferay. Add
the portlet to a page using the *Add &rarr; More* menu and then click
*Configuration* in the portlet menu in the Wiki portlet's title bar. You'll see
some options are likely to be familiar to you by now such as sharing the
application with websites, Facebook, Google Gadgets, etc. You will also notice
that the communication tab has some additional options not seen in the other
portlets.

![Figure 7.27: Communication Tab of the Wiki
Portlet](../../images/05-wiki-configuration.png)

The communication tab of the configuration window allows you to configure
communication across portlets, using predefined public render parameters. From
here you can modify six public render parameters: categoryId, nodeId, nodeName,
resetCur, tag, and title. For each parameter you can:

-   Ignore the values for this parameter that come from other portlets. For
    example, the wiki portlet can be used along with the tags navigation
portlet. When a user clicks on a tag in the tags navigation portlet, the wiki
shows a list of pages with that tag. In some cases an administrator may want
the wiki portlet to always show the front page independently of any tag
navigation done through other portlets. This can be achieved by checking the
Ignore check box so that the values of the parameter coming from those other
portlets are ignored.

-   Read the value of a parameter from another portlet. This is an advanced but
    very powerful option that allows portlets to communicate without
configuring it beforehand. For example, imagine that the wiki portlet is used
to publish information about certain countries. Imagine further that a custom
portlet that allows browsing countries for administrative reasons was written
and placed on the same page. We could associate to this second portlet a public
render parameter called *country* to designate the name of the country. Using
this procedure, we can cause the wiki to show the information from the country
being browsed through in the other portlet. You can do this here for the wiki
by setting the value for the title parameter to be read from the country
parameter of the other portlet.

Once you have set the options the way you want them, click *Save*.

### Managing Wikis [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-managing-wikis-0)

The Wiki portlet can contain many wikis. By default, it contains only one,
called *Main*. To manage Wikis, navigate to the *Control Panel* and select
*Wiki*. This page allows you to add, modify, and delete wikis. The Main wiki
has already been added for you.

At the top of this screen is a *Permissions* button. Clicking this allows you
to define which roles have access to create wikis. If you have created a
specific role for creating wikis, you can click the box in the *Add Node*
column and then click *Submit*, and that role will have access to create new
wikis in this portlet.

Clicking the *Add Wiki* button prompts you to enter a name and description for
the new wiki. You can also set up some default permissions. When you create a
new wiki, it appears in a list at the top of the main page of the Wiki portlet.

Next to each wiki in the list of wiki nodes is an *Actions* button. This button
contains several options:

**Edit:** lets you edit the name and description of the wiki.

**Permissions:** lets you define what roles can add attachments to wiki pages,
add pages to the wiki, delete pages, import pages to the wiki, set permissions
on the wiki, subscribe to the wiki, update existing pages, and view the wiki.

**Import Pages:** allows you to import data from other wikis. This lets you
migrate off of another wiki which you may be using and use the Liferay wiki
instead. You might wish to do this if you are migrating your site from a set of
disparate applications (i.e. a separate forum, a separate wiki, a separate
content management system) to Liferay, which provides all of these features.
Currently, MediaWiki is the only wiki that is supported, but others are likely
to be supported in the future.

**RSS:** opens a new page where you can subscribe to an RSS feed using Live
Bookmarks, Google, or Yahoo.

**Subscribe:** allows you to subscribe to a wiki node, and any time a page is
added or updated Liferay will send you an email informing you what happened.

**Delete:** deletes the wiki node.

To go back to your wiki, click on its name in the list of wikis. Note that
there is also a wrench icon leading to a configuration menu on this portlet in
the Control Panel. This contains several other options which you may have seen
on other portlets.

The *Email From*, *Page Added Email*, and *Page Updated Email* tabs are similar
to the ones for notification email settings for other portlets, allowing you to
customize who wiki emails come from and the format and text of the email that
is sent when a page is added or updated.

The *Display Settings* tab gives you several options for how the wiki should be
displayed. *Enable Related Assets*, *Enable Page Ratings*, *Enable Comments*,
and *Enable Comment Ratings* are similar to the same options in other portlets.
They give you the ability to set how you want users to interact with wiki
documents: a little, a lot, or not at all. Below this, you can set which wikis
are visible in the Wiki portlet by default and which are hidden. You might host
two wikis on a given site, exposing one to the public and keeping the other
private for site members.

Finally, the Wiki portlet also supports RSS feeds as the other collaboration
portlets do, and you can configure its options in the *RSS* tab.

### Adding and Editing Wiki Pages [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-adding-and-editing-wiki-pages-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-adding-and-editing-wiki-pages-0)

By default, there is one page added to your wiki, called *FrontPage*. To get
started adding data to your wiki, click the *Edit* link at the top right of the
portlet. You will be brought to a blank editing page.

![Figure 7.28: Editing the Default Page in the Wiki
Portlet](../../images/05-editing-wiki-page.jpg)

You can now begin to add content to the page. Notice that there is a very
convenient "cheat sheet"? which can help with the wiki syntax. You can use this
syntax to format your wiki pages. Consider, for example, the following wiki
document:

== Welcome to Our Wiki! ==

This is our new wiki, which should allow us to collaborate on documentation.
Feel free to add pages showing people how to do stuff.  Below are links to some
sections that have already been added.

[[Introduction]]

[[Getting Started]]

[[Configuration]]

[[Development]]

[[Support]]

[[Community]]

This would produce the following wiki page:

![Figure 7.29: Wiki Text Added to Front
Page](../../images/05-wiki-front-page.png)

This adds a simple heading, a paragraph of text, and several links to the page.
Since the pages behind these links have not been created yet, clicking one of
those links takes you to an editing screen to create the page. This editing
screen looks just like the one you used previously when you wrote the front
page. Liferay displays a notice at the top of the page stating that the page
does not exist yet, and that you are creating it right now. As you can see, it
is very easy to create wiki pages. All you have to do is create a link from an
existing page. Note that at the top of the screen you can select from the
Creole wiki format and the HTML editor that comes with Liferay. We recommend
that you stick with the Creole format, as it allows for a much cleaner
separation of content and code. If you want all of your users to use the Creole
format, you can disable the HTML format using the `portal-ext.properties` file.
See chapter 14 for details about how to configure this.

At the bottom of the page editing screen, you can select *Categories* for the
article. Categories are hierarchical lists of headings under which you can
create wiki pages. This allows you to organize your content in a more formal
fashion. You can create categories using the Control Panel, in the *Categories*
section.

### Page Details [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-page-details-0)

When viewing a page, you can view its details by clicking the *Details* link
which appears in the top right of the page. This allows you to view many
properties of the page. There are several tabs which organize all of the
details into convenient categories.

#### Details [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-details-0)

The Details tab shows various statistics about the page, and also allows you to
perform some actions on the page.

**Title:** displays the title of the page.

**Format:** displays the format for the page -- either Creole or HTML.

**Latest Version:** displays the latest version of the page. The wiki portlet
automatically keeps track of page versions whenever a page has been edited.

**Created By:** displays the user who created the page.

**Last Changed By:** displays the user who last modified the page.

**Attachments:** displays the number of attachments to the page.

**RSS Subscription:** displays links which allow you to subscribe to the page
as an RSS feed in three formats: RSS 1.0, RSS 2.0, and Atom 1.0.

**Email Subscription:** contains links allowing you to subscribe to the entire
wiki or just to this page.

**Advanced Actions:** contains links allowing you to modify the permissions on
the page, make a copy of the page, move (rename) the page, or delete the page.

#### History [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-history-0)

This tab shows a list of all of the versions of the wiki page since it was
created. You can revert a page back to a previous state and you can also
compare the differences between versions by selecting the versions and then
clicking the *Compare Versions* button.

#### Incoming/Outgoing Links [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-incomingoutgoing-links-0)

The next two tabs are for incoming and outgoing links. These are wiki links to
and from the page. You can use this tab to examine how this page links to other
pages and how other pages link back to this page.

#### Attachments [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-attachments-0)

The last tab is for attachments. You can attach any file to the wiki. This is
mostly used to attach images to wiki articles which can then be referenced in
the text. Referencing them using the proper WikiCreole syntax renders the image
inline, which is a nice way to include illustrations in your wiki documents.

### Navigating in the Wiki Portlet [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-navigating-in-the-wiki-portlet-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-navigating-in-the-wiki-portlet-0)

At the top of the portlet is a list of links which allow you to navigate around
the wiki. Next to the *Manage Wikis* button is a list of wikis that are
currently created in the portlet. Simply click on the wiki's name to begin
browsing that wiki. After this is a set of navigation links:

**Recent Changes:** takes you to a page which shows all of the recently updated
pages.

**All Pages:** takes you to a flat, alphabetical list of all pages currently
stored in the wiki.

**Orphan Pages:** takes you to a list of pages that have no links to them. This
can happen if you take a link out of a wiki page in an edit without realizing
it's the only link to a certain page. This area allows you to review wiki pages
that are orphaned in this way so that you can re-link to them or delete them
from the wiki if they are no longer relevant.

**Draft Pages:** takes you to a list of pages which have not yet been
published. Users can edit pages and save their changes as drafts. They can come
back later to finish their page changes and publish them once they have been
approved.

**Search:** allows you to a term here and click the *Search* button to search
for items in the wiki. If the search term is not found, a link will be
displayed which allows you to create a new wiki page on the topic for which you
searched. 

The Wiki portlet is another full-featured Liferay application with all of the
features you expect from a state of the art wiki. Next, we'll look at how
Liferay handles live chat.

## Find out what others think or do using Polls [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-find-out-what-others-think-or-do-using-polls-0) [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-find-out-what-others-think-or-do-using-polls-0)

How well do you know your users? Do you ever wonder what they're thinking? Is
using your site easy for them? How do they feel about the hot-button issues of
the day? Do they prefer dogs over cats? What about the new policy that
management wants to implement? What's their favorite ice cream flavor? When you
use Liferay's Polls feature you can find out the answer to these and other
questions that should help you better understand your users. 

There are two portlets involved in making and displaying a poll: the Polls
portlet, which is accessed through the Control Panel, and the Polls Display
portlet, which can be added to any page in the portal. 

The Polls portlet helps you set up the poll question and the possible answers
users can select. The Polls Display portlet is an instanceable portlet that
lets you select which poll to display, and is the portlet you put on the page
so users can vote.

The Polls portlet allows users and administrators to create multiple choice
polls that keep track of the votes and display results on the page. Many
separate polls can be managed; a separate portlet called Polls Display can be
configured to display a specific poll's questions and results.

The Polls Display Portlet allows users to vote for a specific poll's questions
and see the results. Questions must be created from the Polls portlet in the
Control Panel. You can display one question at a time or you can combine
several questions inside a nested portlet to create a survey.

We'll begin by creating a poll in the Control Panel.

### Creating a Poll [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-creating-a-poll-0)

In the Control Panel, navigate to the *Polls* link under Content. Click the
*Add Question* button. A form appears that allows you to fill out all the
information for your poll. 

![Figure 7.30: Besides the Title and the Polls Question, you must enter data
for each of the Choices fields when creating a new
poll.](../../images/polls-add-new-question.png)

**Title:** Enter the name of the poll question. 

**Polls Question:** Enter the text of the poll question. 

**Expiration Date:** Enter the date and time you want the poll to expire. 

**Choices:** Enter at least two answer options for the poll question. 

**Add Choice:** Enter additional answer options for the poll question. 

**Permissions:** Manage who can view and edit the poll. 

When you have finished creating your poll, click *Save*, and it is added to the
Polls portlet. 

As more polls are created in the Control Panel, they become accessible through
the Polls Display portlet until they are either deleted or they expire. You can
set an expiration date for a poll by selecting the day and time in the Add Poll
form or in the New Question form. The default is set to *Never Expire*. 

When a poll expires, users can't enter votes any more, but if a Polls Display
portlet is still publishing it, the poll results are displayed on the page. To
remove an expired poll from a page, remove the Poll Display portlet or
configure it to show another poll question. See the section below for more
details about the Polls Display portlet. 

*Permissions* can be set on individual polls as they are set elsewhere in
Liferay Portal. Permissions can be used, for example, to allow some privileged
users to vote on a certain poll question, while others can only view it. For
further information about permissions, please see chapters 15 and 16. 

As you can see, creating a poll is fairly straightforward. Next, let's complete
the two-step process and put your poll on a page.

### Adding a Poll to a Page [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-adding-a-poll-to-a-page-0)

Now that you have created your poll question, it's time to present it to your
users. Navigate to your portal and add the Polls Display portlet to a page. It
is available from the *Content Management* section of the *Add* &rarr; *More*
menu. 

The Polls Display portlet may look strange when it first appears on your page.
That's because it's not configured. Before visitors to your site can use the
poll, they must be able to access it. Click on the link labelled *Please
configure this portlet to make it visible to all users*, and a dialog box like
the one below appears.

![Figure 7.31: In the initial configuration of the Polls Display portlet, the
Question field will remain blank until you select the appropriate poll
question. ](../../images/polls-display-config.png)

Under the Setup tab is a menu option labeled *Question*. Selecting this option
displays the name of the poll you created. Choose it, click *Save*, and it is
displayed on the page. That, in a nutshell, is how you create a poll, but there
is another way to add a question to the Polls Display portlet.

Start by navigating to your portal and placing the Polls Display portlet on a
page. Using the icons in the lower left of the portlet, choose the *Add
Question* button. A new form appears that lets you create another question.
When you are done filling out the form, click *Save* and you new poll appears
on the page.

Once the poll question has been successfully placed on the page, you can
perform other tasks by using the icons in the lower left corner of the portlet.
Besides adding questions, you can also edit the currently selected question or
select existing questions.

![Figure 7.32: These three buttons, highlighted in red, allow you to manage the
configuration of the poll. Notice this poll has
expired.](../../images/polls-config-buttons.png)

**Edit Question:** Displays a similar dialog box to the one used to create the
poll. 

**Select Question:** Displays the same dialog box as Configuration, allowing
you to choose different questions from the dropdown menu. 

**Add Question:** Allows you to create a new question. 

You can also manage the Polls Display portlet by clicking the wrench symbol in
the upper right corner of the portlet's title bar. Now let's see the poll
results.

### Viewing the Poll Results [](id=lp-6-1-ugen07-viewing-the-poll-results-0)

When you create a poll question, it appears in a list in the Control Panel.
After users vote in the poll, the data is collected here. If you select it, the
name and the question, as well as a breakdown of the poll results appears,
including percentages and total number of votes per answer and the total number
of votes cast.

![Figure 7.33: Selecting a poll in the Polls portlet allows you to see all the
information related to the poll results.](../../images/polls-results.png)

Below this is an item called *Charts*. This option shows the poll results
represented in various graphs. The graphs are *Area*, *Horizontal Bar*, *Line*,
*Pie* and *Vertical Bar*.

![Figure 7.34: This is what the pie chart for the Ice Cream poll results looks
like.](../../images/polls-results-pie-chart.png)

There is also a listing of the users who voted in your poll, how they voted,
and a time/date stamp of when their votes were cast. Registered users are
represented by their screen name while Guest users are represented by a number.

With Liferay Polls you can do many things. You can ask users very specific
questions or you can use Polls to create a little fun for your community. As
with most things in Liferay, you are only limited by your imagination. Now
let's see what you can do with Liferay's Chat feature.

## Staying in touch with the Chat [](id=ch-4)

Liferay's Chat portlet provides a convenient way of allowing users to send each
other instant messages when they are logged into your web site. It appears as a
bar at the bottom of every page, showing who is logged on, their statuses, and
any chats the logged-in user has open.

![Figure 7.35: Liferay's Chat
Portlet](../../images/05-liferay-chat-portlet.jpg)

The Chat portlet is distributed with the Liferay bundles, but is not included
as part of the `.war` distribution, as it is a separate plugin. If you
installed the Liferay `.war` manually on your application server, you can
install the Chat portlet by going to the Control Panel, clicking *Plugins
Installation*, and then clicking the *Install More Portlets* button. Find the
Chat portlet in the list, click on it, and then click *Install*.

The Chat portlet is very simple to use. To change the settings, click
*Settings* (found near the lower right corner next to *Online Friends*). Here
you can set your status, choose whether or not to show that you are online, and
whether or not to play a sound if someone sends you a message while you have
the window or tab in the background. The Chat portlet displays the number of
your friends who are online. Click the *Online Friends* link and then click on
a friend's name to open a chat window. You can have multiple chats open at a
time, and can have one or more of them minimized.

### Jabber Server Integration [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-jabber-server-integration-0)

Liferay 6.1 introduced Jabber server integration to Liferay's Chat portlet.
Jabber is the original name of the XMPP (Extensible Messaging and Presence
Protocol) protocol, an open-standard communications protocol based on XML.
Using a chat server helps Liferay's chat scale to very large installations and
allows for communication between different chat clients. For example, Jabber
server integration allows users using the chat portlet in their browser windows
to chat with other users using desktop clients like Empathy, Pidgin, or Kopete. 

Jabber server integration is not enabled by default since it requires a running
Jabber server. Once you have installed and started a Jabber server, you can
enable Jabber server integration by creating a `portlet-ext.properties` file to
override some properties of your Chat portlet's `portlet.properties` file. You
could modify your Chat portlet's `portlet.properties` file directly, but it's a
best practice to override it instead.

#### Installation Steps [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-installation-steps-0)

You can use any chat server that supports Jabber. The Chat portlet's Jabber
server integration feature was tested with versions 3.7.0 and 3.7.1 of
Openfire, a real time collaboration server distributed under the Open Source
Apache License. You can download Openfire from
[http://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/](http://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/).
To enable Jabber chat integration, follow these steps:

1. Start your chat server. If you are using Openfire on a Linux/Mac system, you
can start/stop the chat server by executing the openfire shell script in the
`openfire/bin` directory. Usage: `./openfire start` or `./openfire stop`

2. Override the `portlet.properties` file in your /chat-portlet/WEB-INF/src/
directory with a `portlet-ext.properties` file in the same directory. When you
deploy the portlet, the properties files should be copied to your
/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/classes/ directory. If you have already deployed the Chat
portlet, create the `portlet-ext.properties` file in your
/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/classes/ directory. The contents of your
`portlet-ext.properties` file should like this:

	jabber.enabled=true jabber.import.user.enabled=true
jabber.host=localhost jabber.port=5222   jabber.service.name=<Host Name>
jabber.resource=Liferay    jabber.sock5.proxy.enabled=false
jabber.sock5.proxy.port=-1

Note that you must change `jabber.service.name` to the "Host Name". If you are
using Openfire, you can find the Host Name by using the Openfire administration
web tool. If you did not set up administrative credentials when you started
Openfire, the default credentials are username: admin, password: admin.

![Figure 7.36: Openfire Administration Web
Tool](../../images/jabber.service.name.png)

Additionally, make sure that you set `jabber.enabled` to `true` and have added
the correct values to `jabber.host` and `jabber.port`. If you installed your
chat server on a remote machine or chose to not use the default port, change
`jabber.host` and `jabber.port` accordingly.

3. Deploy your Chat portlet. Remember that this portlet must be of version 6.1
or higher.

#### Single Sign On [](id=lp-6-1-ugen04-single-sign-on-0)

If the property `jabber.import.user.enabled` is set to `true`, the Chat portlet
will import the user automatically to Jabber after he logs in to the portal.
Once the user is imported, he can use any Jabber client using the same screen
name and password he uses to log in to the portal. His buddies will be also
imported as they become online in the Chat portlet.

Note that it's a "lazy import". Users are imported only after they log in to
the portal and their buddies will be added to his list only if they see each
other within the Chat portlet. They won't be able to use other Jabber chat
clients until they log in to the portal.

If `jabber.import.user.enabled` is set to `false`, users need to create their
Jabber account and add buddies manually. They have to create their accounts
using the same screen name and password they use in the portal. If they don't,
the Chat portlet won't be able to connect to their Jabber account.

Alternatively, since Openfire integrates with LDAP, if you are using Openfire
and your portal is also using LDAP for authentication, you can disable the
`jabber.import.user.enabled` property.

Next, let's look at how you can integrate your email addresses with Lifray's
Mail portlet.

## Integrating your email with Liferay Mail [](id=ma-4)

Liferay's Mail portlet enables your users to interact with their email using an
easy to use, ubiquitous web interface. If your mail system supports the IMAP
protocol, you can use the Mail portlet to integrate your users' mail with the
rest of your web site. You can also connect the Mail portlet to a mail account
provided by Google.

The Mail portlet is distributed with the Liferay bundles, but is not included
as part of the `.war` distribution, as it is a separate plugin. If you
installed the Liferay `.war` manually on your application server, you can
install the Mail portlet by going to the Control Panel, clicking *Plugins
Installation*, and then clicking the *Install More Portlets* button. Find the
*Mail* portlet in the list, click on it, and then click *Install*.

![Figure 7.37: Liferay's Mail Portlet](../../images/05-mail-portlet.png)

To connect the Mail portlet with an email account, click the *Add a New Email
Account* link. From there, you are given a choice between a Custom email
Account or a Gmail Account. Choose the option that you wish, and fill out the
form that appears.

For a Gmail account, all you need to do is provide your email address and your
password, and the portlet will take care of the rest.

For a Custom Mail Account, the following fields are necessary:

**Address**: lets you enter the email address which receives mail for this
account.

**Login**: lets you choose a user name for logging into the account.

**Password**: lets you choose a password for logging into the account.

**Incoming Settings**: allows you to specify the host name for your IMAP
(Internet Mail Access Protocol) or POP server.

**Incoming Port**: allows you to specify the port upon which the IMAP or POP
service is running.

**Use Secure Incoming Connection**: allows you to use an encrypted connection
to the server provided that your server supports it.

**Outgoing SMTP Server**: lets you enter the host name of your SMTP (Simple
Mail Transfer Protocol) server.

**Outgoing Port**: allows you to specify the port upon which the SMTP service
is running.

**Use Secure Outgoing Connection**: allows you to use an encrypted connection
to the server provided that your server supports it.

When finished, click *Save*. Your new email account now appears as a tab at the
top of the page along with the button for adding a mail account. In this way,
you can add as many mail accounts as you want in order to view them in the
portlet.

Click the tab for the mail account you just configured to be brought to an
interface which allows you to read your mail and compose new messages. To read
a message, click on it. To compose a new message, click the *Compose Email*
link on the left side of the portlet. A form appears which allows you to
compose an email message using the same rich text editor that appears
everywhere else in Liferay. You can read, reply, and create messages, as well
as manage all of your folders in Liferay's Mail portlet. 

The Mail portlet is a great way to integrate a familiar service with other the
collaboration features that Liferay provides. 

## Summary [](id=summ-26)

We have explored many of the portlets in Liferay's collaboration suite. You
have seen how you can configure all of the portlets in a similar fashion using
a unified user interface. After this, we went over all of the portlets in
succession.

The Blogs and Blogs Aggregation portlets can be used to manage shared blogs or
blogs belonging to a group of people at once. These portlets have all the
features you would want in a blog, including rich text editing, links to news
aggregators, tags, RSS feeds, and more.

The Calendar portlet likewise can be used to manage a shared calendar or a
group calendar. It includes features for events, event notification, repeatable
events, and import and export to and from the standard iCalendar format.

Discussion becomes easy with Liferay's Message Boards portlet. This portlet can
be used to manage heavily trafficked discussion forums with ease. It inherits
all of the security features of the Liferay platform and includes
administrative functions for thread priorities, moving threads, nested
discussion categories, banning users, and more.

Liferay's Wiki portlet is a state of the art wiki application that users can
make use of to collaborate on web pages. Again, it inherits the strengths of
the Liferay platform in the form of security, interface, and search. You can
use the wiki portlet to manage several wiki nodes or use many wiki portlets to
manage one node each.

The Polls portlet is a fun way to interact with users of your site to get an
understanding of what they're thinking at any given time. It allows you to
create multiple choice polls that keep track of the votes and display results
on the page. You can view these results in a number of ways, including charts.

Liferay provides a chat solution for your portal that's very easy to use. It
allows logged-in users to see who else is logged in to the portal and view
their status. Users can go invisible if they don't want others to know that
they're online. Users can chat with each other via instant messages. You can
also set up a Jabber chat server and configure Liferay to use it; this allows
users who have logged in to your portal via their browsers to chat with users
using traditional desktop clients.

Integrating mail with your portal is easy with the Mail portlet. You can add as
many custom or Gmail mail accounts as you wish, and this portlet can keep them
all organized in one place, together with the rest of the things Liferay is
aggregating for you.

Liferay's collaboration platform is a full suite of integrated applications
that empower users to work together. You can use them to great effect to
enhance your portal and to build a vibrant, active community. 
