
# Using Workflow [](id=workflow-with-kal-3)

Liferay Portal includes a workflow engine called Kaleo. In Greek, this word
means "called ones," which is appropriate for a workflow engine that calls users
to participate in a process designed for them. Kaleo workflow allows a user to
define any number of simple to complex business processes/workflows, deploy
them, and manage them through a portal interface. The processes have knowledge
of users, groups and roles. You don't have to write a single line of code to
accomplish this: all you have to do is create a single XML document. And if
you're a Liferay EE customer, you get a graphical workflow designer which gives
you a point and click interface to create workflows. 

To explain how to use Kaleo Workflow, this chapter covers: 

-	Installation

-	Creating workflow definitions

-   Configuring assets to use workflow

-	How users interact with workflow

We introduced Kaleo workflow in chapter 2, where we discussed how to set up an
approval process for basic web content. Once we're done with this chapter, you
should be familiar with how to use Liferay's Kaleo workflow to set up approval
process for any kind of content before it is published to your portal. 

## Enabling workflow [](id=installati-3)

Liferay's Kaleo workflow engine ships with CE versions of Liferay. If you have
EE or if you uninstalled it, the plugin can be installed through the Liferay
marketplace. The name is `kaleo-web` and you'll find it in the list of web
plugins. Installing the plugin adds a number of new options to the control
panel: 

-   My Workflow Tasks

-   Workflow Configuration

-   My Submissions

-   Workflow

There is one workflow that comes bundled with the `kaleo-web` plugin: Single
Approver Workflow. This workflow requires one approval before an asset can be
published. One of the conveniences of using Liferay's workflow engine is that
any roles specified in the workflow definition are created automatically when
the definition is deployed. This provides a level of integration with the portal
that third party engines cannot match. The Single Approver Workflow contains
three roles each with different scopes. The scope of each role can be deduced by
their names: Site Content Reviewer, Organization Content Reviewer and Portal
Content Reviewer. 

Let's jump right in and create a workflow process definition. 

## Creating new workflow definitions [](id=creating-process-definitions)

A Kaleo workflow, called a *process definition*, is defined in an XML file and
is executed by users on the portal. You can create as many different workflow
definitions as needed to manage the work done on your portal. You can define new
user roles in the workflow to manage the approval process or use roles that
already exist in your portal.

The XML file has several parts which define the workflow. To get an idea of how
this works, we'll examine the default `single-approver-definition.xml` file
which is included in the the Liferay Kaleo plugin.

The key parts of the workflow definition are the asset that's running through
the workflow, the nodes of the workflow and the transitions between nodes. The
asset is any kind of asset registered in Liferay: web content, wiki articles,
message board threads and more. Developers can create their own assets as well
to be used with workflow (see [*Liferay in Action*](http://manning.com/sezov) or
*Liferay Developer's Guide* for more information). Nodes represent stages of the
workflow and there are several types. Transitions occur between nodes and
indicate what the next node should be. 

Think of workflow as a state machine made up of nodes. A node can be a state, a
task, a condition, a fork, a join or a timer. Transitions are used to move from
one node to another. Each type of node has different properties. For example,
states execute actions automatically and require no user input. Tasks block
until user input completes a transition to another state. The transition then
moves the workflow to the next task or state. This cycle continues until the end
Approved state is reached. For example, you could create a workflow which goes
through two approvers. Initiating the workflow puts it in the In Review state
and then transitions to a task which requires user input. Users approve or
reject the asset as part of the task. When the first user approves the workflow,
a condition checks to see if there are two approvals. Since there is only one,
workflow transitions back to the task. When the second user approves the
workflow, the condition finds there are two approvers and it triggers a
different transition to the Approved state. 

Let's look in detail at how you'd create a workflow using a single approver.

### Starting a workflow definition [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-starting-a-workflow-definition-0)

Below is a diagram of a single approver workflow definition. It has only two
tasks and two states.  

![Figure 10.1: The default single approver workflow. Arrows represent
transitions and boxes represent states and
tasks.](../../images/kaleo-workflow-single-approver.png)

First you define the schema. For Liferay workflows using Kaleo,
`liferay-worklow-definition-6_1_0.xsd` should be your schema. You can find this
schema in the `definitions` folder of the Liferay source or a good XML editor
can cache it from Liferay's web site.

    <workflow-definition
	xmlns="urn:liferay.com:liferay-workflow_6.1.0"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	xsi:schemaLocation="urn:liferay.com:liferay-workflow_6.1.0 
	http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-workflow-definition_6_1_0.xsd"
    >

Next you define a name and description for the workflow. This appears in the
control panel when users choose and configure workflows.

    <name>Single Approver</name>
    <description>A single approver can approve a workflow
    content.</description>
    <version>1</version>

After that, you define your initial state. 

### Creating an initial state [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-creating-an-initial-state-0)

In this case, the state is simply that the asset has been created. States can
contain actions and transitions. Actions can contain scripts. You can specify
the language of the script with the `<script-language>` tag. Scripts can be
written in Groovy, JavaScript, Ruby or Python (see chapter 18 for more
information on leveraging scipts in workflow). For a state, the action is
triggered automatically and then executes a transition. Transitions move you to
a new state or task.

    <state>
        <name>created</name>
        <initial>true</initial>

From the initial state, you transition to a new task, where further processing
is blocked so the asset can be reviewed.

        <transitions>
            <transition>
            <name>review</name>
            <target>review</target>
            <default>true</default>
            </transition>
        </transitions>
    </state>

The next step is to create a task. 

### Creating tasks [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-creating-tasks-0)

The task has several parts and is the most complex part of the definition. Tasks
are linked with roles in order to choose who should complete the task. Roles are
notified that there's new content in need of review. If you define a role that
doesn't exist, it is created automatically.

The first task listed in the `single-approver-definition.xml` workflow
definition is the *update* task. Though it appears first in the file, it's
actually not the first task in the workflow. The *update* task is the task
that's assigned by the workflow if the asset is rejected by an approver. It's
listed first because it's the default task: when this task is triggered, the
workflow process is reset back to the beginning. In this task, the asset is
assigned back to the content creator, who receives an email notification and is
required to resubmit the asset. Once the task is resubmitted, it goes back to
the review stage.

You can also see the task is assigned to `<user/>`. This tag always assigns the
task back to the user who created the asset.

    <task>
	<name>update</name>
	<actions>
        <notification>
		<name>Creator Modification Notification</name>
		<execution-type>onAssignment</execution-type>
		<template>Your submission was rejected by a reviewer, please modify and resubmit.</template>
		<template-language>text</template-language>
		<notification-type>email</notification-type>
        </notification>
	</actions>
	<assignments>
        <user />
	</assignments>
	<transitions>
        <transition>
		<name>resubmit</name>
		<target>review</target>
		<default>true</default>
        </transition>
	</transitions>
    </task>
 
The *review* task is the first task in the workflow. This is where portal users
with the proper role review the content and decide to reject it (move it back to
the beginning) or accept it (transition it to the next step).

Once the transition has been made to this task, a notification is sent to those
who are assigned to the task. You can edit the name or content of the
notification in the XML file.

    <task>
	<name>review</name>
	<actions>
        <notification>
		<name>Review Notification</name>
		<execution-type>onAssignment</execution-type>
		<template>You have a new submission waiting for your review in the workflow.</template>
		<template-language>text</template-language>
		<notification-type>email</notification-type>
        </notification>
	</actions>
    
You must also assign the task to a specific role or roles. This role doesn't
have to be the role you notified. For example, you might want to notify all the
content creators any time a new item is submitted. Regardless of who you're
notifying, you definitely want to send a notification to anyone who is
responsible for approving content.

### Sending notifications [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-sending-notifications-0)

Notifications need an `execution-type` which can be `onAssignment`, `onEntry` or
`onExit`.

-   `onAssignment` generates and sends the notification when the user is
    assigned the task in the workflow. **Note:** `onAssignment` notification
    will not work if you wish to notify a user that is not part of the workflow.

-   `onEntry` generates and sends the notification when entering the workflow
    task or state.

-   `onExit` generates and sends the notification when exiting the workflow task
    or state.

Notifications also need a `notification-type` which can be `email`, `im` or
`private-message`. Note the `private-message` type is a placeholder for now;
that functionality is in Liferay's Social Office product but has not yet been
integrated into Liferay Portal. Your notification type and execution type should
complement each other. You wouldn't want to use an `onExit` execution type with
a private message, because the user won't receive that message until he or she
logs back in. Generally speaking, email notifications work best with `onExit` or
`onAssignment`, while IM or private message work better with `onEntry`.

Email and private message notifications can also be created as plain text or you
can create formatted content using Freemarker or Velocity templating languages.
When creating the notification, you need to specify the `template-language` as
`text`, `freemarker` or `velocity`.

In this workflow, anyone who is capable of approving the content is notified
`onAssignment`. This includes administrators and site and organization owners.
The `role-type` tag helps the system sort out who should receive the
notification based on the scope and can be set as *community*, *organization* or
*portal*. 

	<assignments>
        <roles>
		<role>
            <role-type>community</role-type>
            <name>Community Administrator</name>
		</role>
		<role>
            <role-type>community</role-type>
            <name>Community Content Reviewer</name>
		</role>
		<role>
            <role-type>community</role-type>
            <name>Community Owner</name>
		</role>
		<role>
            <role-type>organization</role-type>
            <name>Organization Administrator</name>
		</role>
		<role>
              <role-type>organization</role-type>
              <name>Organization Content Reviewer</name>
		</role>
		<role>
            <role-type>organization</role-type>
            <name>Organization Owner</name>
		</role>
		<role>
            <role-type>regular</role-type>
            <name>Portal Content Reviewer</name>
		</role>
		<role>
            <role-type>regular</role-type>
            <name>Administrator</name>
		</role>
        </roles>
	</assignments>

Once the content is approved you'll want to transition to a new state. 

### Using transitions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-using-transitions-0)

In this case, you only need a single approver, then the transition goes to the
final approved state. In more complex workflows, you might transition to a
second tier approver.

	<transitions>
        <transition>
		<name>approve</name>
		<target>approved</target>
		<default>true</default>
        </transition>
        <transition>
		<name>reject</name>
		<target>update</target>
		<default>false</default>
        </transition>
	</transitions>
    </task>

Finally, we define our end state. Remember states automatically run all actions
that are assigned to them, so a script executes and sets the state of the
content to *approved*. Workflow scripts are completely contained within XML
workflow definitions.

You could also write a customized script if there were actions outside the
standard one that you need to perform on your asset. The script below, written
in JavaScript, sets the status of the asset to *approved*. Of course, there's
much more you can do with scripts. You don't even have to use JavaScript: if you
want, you can change the `<script-language>` to another supported language
(Ruby, Groovy or Python) and rewrite the action with additional details to meet
your needs.

    <state>
	<name>approved</name>
	<actions>
        <action>
		<name>approve</name>
		<execution-type>onEntry</execution-type>
		<script>
        <![CDATA[Packages.com.liferay.portal.kernel.workflow.WorkflowStatusManagerUtil.updateStatus(Packages.com.liferay.portal.kernel.workflow.WorkflowConstants.toStatus("approved"), workflowContext);]]>
		</script>
		<script-language>javascript</script-language>
        </action>
	</actions>
    </state>

To create longer workflows, you'd create additional states, tasks and
transitions according to your requirements. For instance, if you wanted to have
a second level of review before an item is approved, you'd create a new task in
between the *review* task and the *approved* state. The task itself might have
similar content to *review* but you would assign it to a different role. The
*review* task would transition to your new task and the new task would
transition to the *approved* state. 

You can also use *forks* and *joins* to create more complex workflows.

### Using forks and joins [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-using-forks-and-joins-0)

Forks and joins are used for parallel processing. For example, say you have a
new offer you'd like to put up on your site but it needs to go through both the
sales manager and the marketing manager first. You can set up a workflow that
notifies both managers at the same time so they can approve them individually.
This way, you're not waiting for one manager's approval before you can send the
notification to the other manager. The below illustration shows how a workflow
with a fork and a join might be designed. 

<!-- | TODO - I deleted the original one... --> ![Figure 10.2: Parallel Approval
Design](../../images/kaleo-workflow-parallel-approval.png)

You can transition to a fork from a task or state. From the fork, you can
transition to multiple tasks or states which occur in parallel. In the previous
example, when we have multiple transitions from one task, they're mutually
exclusive: you either trigger one or the other. The transitions are also serial,
meaning one must occur before the next one can occur. With a parallel workflow,
you can have different approvals going through different users at the same time.
For example, you could use this to separate two different departments' approval
chains on a single asset. A fork should be formatted like this:

    <fork>
		<name>review_fork</name>
		<transitions>
			<transition>
				<name>node_1</name>
				<target>review_one</target>
			</transition>
			<transition>
				<name>node_2</name>
				<target>review_two</target>
			</transition>
		</transitions>
	</fork>
	
To bring a fork back together, transition both nodes of the fork back to a
single join. A join is formatted similarly to a fork, except that any
transitions are serial, not parallel, as in the example below.

    <join>
		<name>approved</name>
		<transitions>
			<transition>
				<name>result</name>
				<target>done</target>
				<default>true</default>
			</transition>
		</transitions>
	</join>

Another important consideration when creating parallel approvals is each node
needs its own "rejected" state for cases where content is approved in one node
but rejected in another. Another feature you can use in custom workflows along
with forks and joins is Timers. While using parallel workflow enables you to
speed up your process by getting content in front more people at once, instead
of making them wait in line, timers allow you to add some urgency to the
process.
	
<!-- | TODO I accidentally removed this one too -->
### Timers [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-timers-0)

**Timers** are a new workflow feature in 6.1, which help make sure important
tasks in a workflow aren't forgotten or left undone because of an oversight or
the absence of someone on the critical path. The basic concept of the timer is
that after a period of time specified, a specific action occurs. There are two
main elements for a Timer, the **Task Timer** and the **Timer Action**.

Timers occur within a Task element and are formatted like:

	<task>
		...
		<task-timers>
			<task-timer>
				<name></name>
				<delay>
					<duration></duration>
					<scale></scale>
				</delay>
				<timer-actions>
					...
				</timer-actions>
			</task-timer>
		</task-timers>
		...
	</task>
		
The outer element is <task-timers> because you can have multiple timers with
multiple actions. The specific <task-timer> then contains the element <delay>
which has a <duration> and <scale>. The duration can be any number, whole or
fractional, and it's significance is defined by the scale. The scale tells you
what unit of time the duration is talking about - seconds, minutes, hours, days,
weeks, months or years. Once you've determined the time, you'll want to pick an
action - either a notification, reassignment or a custom script.

Notifications are pretty simple - if a certain amount of time passes and an
action isn't completed yet, the user assigned to the task will receive a fresh
notification. With the timer, you have all of the standard notification types
available and you can choose a different notification type than was used for the
original notifcation. For example, you could create a definition such that when
a new item is submitted to the workflow, all members of the *Content Reviewer*
role receive a notification. You could then use a timer to say if the content
hasn't been reviewed within two hours each member of the *Content Reviewer* role
will receive a second notification via instant messenger.

A Notification would be formatted like this:

    <timer-actions>
		<timer-notification>
			<name></name>
			<template></template>
			<template-language>text</template-language>
			<notification-type>im</notification-type>
		</timer-notification>
    </timer-actions>


Reassignments are designed to keep the workflow moving, even if a key person is
out of the office. With a timer set to reassign, after the specified amount of
time has passed, the task can be assigned to a new role. Building off of our
example above, if the Content Reviewers all received the IM notification after
two hours, but the content still wasn't approved after four hours, the workflow
could be set to automatically reassign to the task to the *Adminstrator* role.

A Reassignment would be formatted like this:

    <timer-actions>
		<reassignments>
			<assignments>
				<roles>
					<role>
						<role-type></role-type>
						<name></name>
					</role>
					...
				</roles>
			</assignments>
		</reassignments>
    </timer-actions>
    
Obviously we can't think of eveything, so if you have an idea for using timers
in your workflow that doesn't fit into our design, you could access Liferay's
scripting engine to create a custom action to happen after a specified amount of
time. For example, if you had means of sending electric shocks through employees
chairs if they weren't doing their work, and had created a Liferay portlet to
access the shock mechanism, you could use a custom script to zap any users who
were at their desk that hadn't reviewed content assigned to them.

    <timer-actions>
		<action>
				<name></name>
				<script>
					<![CDATA[
					]]>
				</script>
				<script-language></script-language>
				<execution-type></execution-type>
		</action>
    </timer-actions>

For more information on using scripting in Liferay, please refer to chapter 18.

Using workflows and approvals is necessary for virtually any organization and
timers are an excellent way to help mitigate the potential headaches caused by
having multiple bottlenecks through the process. Using timers in conjunction
with other workflow features can help you create powerful workflows for your
organization.

### Putting it all together [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-putting-it-all-together-0)

The Kaleo workflow engine is deeply integrated with Liferay Portal. It can
generate roles scoped for organizations, sites and for the whole portal based on
workflow definitions. You can also customize workflow options for individual
sites.

Users are the most important part of the workflow, since they're the ones who do
all the work. To make a user a part of the workflow process, you assign them a
role which you defined in your workflow . When you're creating your workflow
definition, you can create new roles by defining them in the XML file or by
using roles which you have already created in your portal. Roles created
automatically are always portal scoped, so if you want to use site or
organization scoped roles, create the roles before deploying your workflow to
the portal.

A portal administrator can create a default workflow definition scheme for each
application which applies for the entire portal and site and organization
administrators can customize the settings for their sites and organizations. Now
that we've seen how to create workflow definitions, let's discuss how to use
them. 

## Configuring assets to use workflow process definitions [](id=using-workflow-in-the-control-panel)

Most of your workflow configuration is done via the control panel. Everything
you need to do in the portal can be done through simple GUI controls.

![Figure 10.3: Adding a Workflow
Definition](../../images/kaleo-workflow-new-definition-control-panel.png)

You can find the Workflow section under the Portal heading in the control panel.
There are three options under Workflow: *Definitions*, *Default Configuration*
and *Submissions*.

If you created a new workflow definition, you need to add it so it can be used
in the portal. Click *Definitions*. By default, only the Single Approver
workflow appears here. Clicking *Add* allows you to enter a title for a new
workflow definition and upload the XML file. Once you add a file here, it's
added to the portal and is immediately available for use.

Under *Default Configuration*, you can set the workflow behavior (if any) for
all workflow-enabled applications on the portal. You can choose to use no
workflow, which is the default, or select any installed workflow definition.
Setting the default configuration causes any newly created sites to default to
that configuration. An administrator can then edit the definitions for each one
individually through the *Workflow Configuration* page.

Clicking on *Submissions* will let you view any currently pending assets or any
assets which were previously approved.

### Configuring workflow [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-configuring-workflow-0)

After you have uploaded workflow definitions and set the default workflow
behavior you can go up to *Workflow Configuration* and tweak the definitions
you're using for each site individually.

![Figure 10.4: The Workflow Configuration
Page](../../images/kaleo-workflow-configuration.png)

Using the context selector drop-down menu in the control canel, you can select
any site in the portal. All the options under that heading, including Workflow
Configuration, now apply to that particular site. Using workflow is just as
easy. 

### My Workflow Tasks [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-my-workflow-tasks-0)

My Workflow Tasks is a personalized version of the Workflow Tasks and it's found
in your personal section of the control panel. Here are specific tasks which
have been assigned to you or assigned to a role of which you are a member. You
can also view your completed tasks.

![Figure 10.5: My Workflow Tasks Page](../../images/kaleo-workflow-my-tasks.png)

It's here workflow users review and approve content. By clicking on the actions
next to a piece of content, a user can view the content, then choose to approve
or reject it and add comments. 

### My Submissions [](id=lp-6-1-ugen06-my-submissions-0)

My Submissions is found under your user's personal information in the control
panel. From this screen you can view any assets  you have submitted to review.
Those currently under review are listed under the *Pending* tab and those that
have been reviewed are listed under the *Completed* tab.

![Figure 10.6: The My Submissions
Page](../../images/kaleo-workflow-my-submissions.png)

Besides viewing your work, you can also withdraw a submission from the review
process by clicking on *Withdraw Submission* from the *Pending* tab.

### Using Kaleo Workflow Processes in Liferay Portal [](id=using-kaleo-workflow-processes-in-liferay-portal)

Before workflow can be used, you must define which types of assets on the portal
are workflow-enabled. If you have created additional definitions, you must also
choose the workflow definition to use for each asset that is workflow-enabled.

![Figure 10.7: You can select which site to work on by using the drop-down menu
in the Content section of the control
panel.](../../images/kaleo-workflow-control-panel-context-selector.png)

To demonstrate how this works, we'll create a press release. Press releases
should be posted in the *Newsroom* section of the web site, so before setting
specific workflow configuration options or creating content, create the Newsroom
site and switch to it in the control panel. In Workflow Configuration, set Web
Content to use the Single Approver workflow.

Next, create two users, a Content Creator and a Content Reviewer. The Content
Creator logs in and creates a new press release for Nose-ster and clicks *Submit
for Publication*. This triggers the workflow process and notifies the Content
Reviewer. When the Content Reviewer logs in, he or she can assign the workflow
task to him- or herself and approve the content.

![Figure 10.8: Before a Content Reviewer can approve content, he must assign it
to himself or have an administrator assign it to
him.](../../images/kaleo-workflow-assign-to-me.png)

Once the content is approved, it can be posted on the Press Releases page in a
web content display portlet. 

There's more. EE customers get extra features that enable them to create
workflows without having to deal with XML. 

## Using workflow with other applications [](id=lp-6-1-ugen10-using-workflow-with-other-applications-0)

We saw an example of how to use workflow with Liferay web content in chapter 2.
In this section, we'll discuss how to use workflow with other applications.
First, we'll look at using workflow with Documents and Media. After that, we'll
look at using workflow with Blogs, Wikis, and Message Boards.

### Documents and media [](id=lp-6-1-ugen10-documents-and-media-0)

You can enable workflow for most portal resources, including page revisions for
staging, web content, and collaborative applications, from the Control Panel.
However, workflow for Documents and Media can only be enabled within a Documents
and Media portlet since it must be defined at the folder level. To see how this
works, create a new page in the default site called *Documents and Media* and
add the Documents and Media portlet to this page. Then click *Add* &rarr;
*Folder*, enter the name *My Documents*, and click *Save*. Mouse over your new
My Documents folder, click on the gray icon that appears at the top right corner
of the folder, and select *Edit*.

![Figure 10.9: Workflow for Documents and Media must be enabled at the folder
level. Edit a folder to select a workflow.](../../images/folder-edit.png)

By default, the *Use document type restrictions and workflow of the parent
folder* button is selected. To enable workflow for this folder, select the
*Define specific document type restrictions and workflow for this folder*
button. After you've selected this button, a *Default Workflow for all Document
Types* dropdown menu appears. By default, you can select *No workflow* or
*Single Approver*. Any custom workflows that you added also appear in this
dropdown menu. You can add custom workflows through the Workflow page in the
Portal section of the Control Panel.

![Figure 10.10: You can use the document type restrictions and workflow of the
parent folder or you can define specific document type restrictions and workflow
for this folder.](../../images/folder-workflow.png)

After you've selected the *Single Approver* workflow and clicked *Save*,
workflow takes effect for the My Documents folder. Try adding a new document to
your My Documents folder--notice that the *Publish* button now says *Submit for
Publication* since workflow is enabled. Any users assigned to the (Portal,
Organization, or Site) Content Reviewer roles can see that your document has
been submitted for publication by navigating to the Control Panel and clicking
on *My Workflow Tasks*. Ordinarily, the same user who submitted a document for
publication wouldn't also approve it but we'll do this to demonstrate how the
process works.

Navigate to the Control Panel and click on *My Workflow Tasks*. The document
that you submitted for publication appears under *Assigned to My Roles* since
you're an administrator. Click *Actions* &rarr; *Assign to Me* next to your
document. Then click *Actions* &rarr; *Approve* next to the document when it
appears in the *Assigned to Me* category. That's it--your document has passed
through the workflow!

### Collaboration [](id=lp-6-1-ugen10-collaboration-0)

To enable workflow for collaborative applications, first navigate to the Control
Panel and select a scope in the context menu selector. You can enable workflow
globally, or for a specific site. Once you've chosen a scope, click on *Workflow
Configuration* in the content section of the Control Panel. This page lists the
portal resources for which you can select a workflow.

![Figure 10.11: The Workflow Configuration page of the Control Panel lists the
resources for which can select a workflow for your chosen
scope.](../../images/workflow-configuration.png)

To select a workflow, click on the Workflow dropdown menu and choose a workflow.
By default, you can only select *No workflow* or *Single Approver*. Custom
workflows that you added also appear in this dropdown menu. You can add custom
workflows through the Workflow page in the Portal section of the Control Panel.
To enable workflow for the collaborative applications, select the *Single
Approver* for the Blogs Entry, Message Boards Message and Wiki Page resources,
then click *Save.*

To test the workflow for collaborative applications, add a page called
*Collaboration* to the site whose scope you selected when you enabled workflow.
Then add the Blogs, Message Boards, and Wiki portlets to this page. Using each
portlet, add a blog entry, post a new message board thread, and write some
content for the Wiki frontpage. For each application, notice that the *Publish*
button is replaced by a *Submit for Publication* button since workflow is
enabled.

The workflow process for collaborative applications works the same way as in the
examples you've already seen. Any users assigned to the (Portal, Organization,
or Site) Content Reviewer roles can see that your blog post, message board
thread, and wiki article have been submitted for publication by navigating to
the Control Panel and clicking on *My Workflow Tasks*. Of course, since you
submitted these items for publication, it wouldn't make sense in a real-world
use case for you to approve them. However, to see how the workflow process
works, go ahead and approve these items yourself; you can do this since you're
an administrator.

Navigate to the Control Panel and click on *My Workflow Tasks*. The items you've
submitted for publication appear under *Assigned to My Roles*. Click *Actions*
&rarr; *Assign to Me* next to the items you've submitted. Then click *Actions*
&rarr; *Approve* next to each item when it appears in the *Assigned to Me*
category. That's it--your blog post, message board thread, and wiki article have
passed through the workflow!

## Summary [](id=lp-6-1-ugen10-summary-0)

In this chapter, we explained how to install the Kaleo workflow plugin for
Liferay EE. Liferay's Kaleo workflow engine is included with Liferay CE. We
discussed how to create new workflow definitions and examined the XML schema for
them. We looked at how to choose different workflow processes for different
asset types. We also explained how end-users can interact with the approval
process. Finally, we discussed how to use workflow with different types of
applications such as Documents and Media and Blogs, Wikis, and Message Boards.
In the next chapter, we'll look at Kaleo forms and the Kaleo workflow designer.
