# What's New in Liferay 6.2 APIs? [](id=whats-new-in-liferay-6-2-apis-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

---

![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) This chapter is under construction. 

---

Liferay Portal 6.2 offers a host of new features and updates to the previous
release. Our guide to *Using Liferay Portal 6.2* shows you how to use these
features and updates and this guide shows you how to leverage them in the
applications you develop. In this chapter, we want to highlight some of the
changes to Liferay Portal's application programming interface (API). We've added
APIs for the new features and improved APIs for previously existing features. In
some cases we've modified portal's API and removed previously deprecated
interfaces. The Javadoc for Liferay Portal's entire API is availabe at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/). But
we'll describe some of the most notable additions and changes here in this
chapter. 

<!-- NOTE TO CONTRIBUTERS

Add content describing your API changes. If a section related to your feature
already exists, integrate your content with that section. Otherwise, add a new
section and content describing the your feature's new or modified API. 

Example,

    ## FeatureXYZ

    Describe your new/modified API here

Briefly describe your feature, even if it's an existing feature from the
previous release. Explain what the new or modified API does and whow how to use
it by way of code example. 

If your feature is already described in another chapter of the Dev Guide,
consider describing the API change there instead of here in this chapter. If you
do write about it in another chapter, still mention the API change here in this
chapter and refer to that other chapter and section. That way readers can locate
your API change description from this chapter.

Example,

    ## Message Bus FeatureXYZ

    You can now to x, y, and z in the Message Bus API. See the Using Message Bus
    section of Chapter 6 for details. 

-->

No matter which Liferay APIs you're using, you'll need to understand Liferay's
deprecation policy. That way you'll know when methods from our API's are
deprecated, and you can make any necessary changes. We'll describe the
deprecation policy next. 

## Liferay's Deprecation Policy [](id=liferays-deprecation-policy-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-02-en)

Methods in Liferay's APIs are deprecated when they're no longer called by
Liferay internally. Method deprecation occurs during major and minor releases of
Liferay. A change in the first or second digits of consecutive Liferay releases
indicates a major or minor release, respectively. For example, the release of
Liferay Portal 6.2.0 after 5.2.0 was a major release; whereas the release of
6.2.0 after 6.1.30 was a minor release. Major and minor releases can have API
deprecations. 

APIs should not be deprecated between mainenance releases. Mainenance releases
are signified by a change in the third digit of the release number. For example,
the release of Liferay Portal 6.1.30 after 6.1.20 was a maintenance release and
therefore should have no API deprecations. 

To understand Liferays releases, see [Using Liferay Portal
6.2](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/understanding-liferays-releases-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-15-en)

## Summary [](id=summary-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-14-en)

That about wraps up our chapter on Liferay's APIs. Next, we'll reflect on what
we've learned in this guide and conclude our journey together. 
