# Context Contributors [](id=context-contributors)

JSP templates are the predominant templating framework used throughout
@product@'s themes, application display templates (ADTs), DDM templates, etc.
JSPs, however, are not the only templating language supported by @product@.
Many developers prefer other templating frameworks (e.g., FreeMarker and
Velocity), and Liferay caters to those developers by offering the Context
Contributors framework.

Context Contributors change the context of templates that get rendered by
injecting variables usable by your chosen template framework. This lets you
contribute to non-JSP templating languages to modify themes, ADTs, and any other
templates used in @product@. For example, suppose you want your theme to have
access to the current user to display something about him or her. You could
create a context contributor to inject the User object to your theme's context.
Anyone creating a theme could then get the User object and use it.

You can also provide additional functionality out-of-the-box for a context using
context contributors. For instance, you could pass in a variable to a menu's
theme that determines whether or not to display it.

@product@ uses context contributors in several areas by default to inject
context-specific variables into a theme. You'll learn how to create your own
context contributor, and then you'll examine one example of how @product@ uses
context contributors next.

1.  Create a generic OSGi module using your favorite third party tool, or use
    the [Blade CLI](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/blade-cli).

2.  Create a unique package name in the module's `src` directory and create a
    new Java class in that package. To follow naming conventions, begin the
    class name with the entity you want to inject context-specific variables
    for, followed by *TemplateContextContributor* (e.g.,
    `ProductMenuTemplateContextContributor`).

3.  Directly above the class's declaration, insert the following annotation:

        @Component(
            immediate = true,
            property = {"type=" + TemplateContextContributor.[Type of Contributor]},
            service = TemplateContextContributor.class
        )

    The `immediate` element instructs the module to immediately start once
    deployed to @product@. The `type` property should be set to one of the two
    fields defined in the
    [TemplateContextContributor](https://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0/javadocs/portal-kernel/com/liferay/portal/kernel/template/TemplateContextContributor.html)
    interface: `TYPE_GLOBAL` or `TYPE_THEME`. The `TYPE_THEME` field should be
    set if you only wish to inject context-specific variables for your theme;
    otherwise, setting the `TYPE_GLOBAL` field affects every context execution
    in @product@, like themes, ADTs, DDM templates, etc. Finally, your `service`
    element should be set to `TemplateContextContributor.class`.

    The [ProductNavigationTemplateContextContributor](https://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0/javadocs/modules/apps/web-experience/product-navigation/com.liferay.product.navigation.product.menu.theme.contributor/com/liferay/product/navigation/product/menu/theme/contributor/internal/ProductMenuTemplateContextContributor.html)
    class's `@Component` annotation follows a similar layout:

        @Component(
            immediate = true,
            property = {"type=" + TemplateContextContributor.TYPE_THEME},
            service = TemplateContextContributor.class
        )

4.  Implement the
    [TemplateContextContributor](https://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0/javadocs/portal-kernel/com/liferay/portal/kernel/template/TemplateContextContributor.html)
    interface in your `-TemplateContextContributor` class. This only requires
    implementing the `prepare(Map<String,Object>, HttpServletRequest)` method.

For a quick example of how you can implement the `TemplateContextContributor`
interface to inject context-specific variables into a context, you'll examine
the [ProductNavigationTemplateContextContributor](https://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0/javadocs/modules/apps/web-experience/product-navigation/com.liferay.product.navigation.product.menu.theme.contributor/com/liferay/product/navigation/product/menu/theme/contributor/internal/ProductMenuTemplateContextContributor.html)
class used by @product@ by default. This class injects variables into Liferay's
FreeMarker theme and determines whether the Product Menu is displayed in the
current theme.

The `ProductNavigationTemplateContextContributor` class implements the
`prepare(...)` method, which injects new variables into the theme context:

    @Override
    public void prepare(
        Map<String, Object> contextObjects, HttpServletRequest request) {

        if (!isShowProductMenu(request)) {
            return;
        }

        String cssClass = GetterUtil.getString(
            contextObjects.get("bodyCssClass"));
        String productMenuState = SessionClicks.get(
            request,
            ProductNavigationProductMenuWebKeys.
                PRODUCT_NAVIGATION_PRODUCT_MENU_STATE,
            "closed");

        contextObjects.put(
            "bodyCssClass", cssClass + StringPool.SPACE + productMenuState);

            contextObjects.put("liferay_product_menu_state", productMenuState);
    }

This method prepares the context contributor to inject variables into the theme
to be used by the Product Menu. For this example, the `cssClass` and
`productMenuState` variables are defined and then placed in the `contextObjects`
map. By doing this, these variables have been injected into the theme context,
making them accessible to the theme. Specifically, the `cssClass` variable
provides styling for the Product Menu and the `productMenuState` variable
determines whether the visible Product Menu should be open or closed.

+$$$

**Note:** In previous versions of Liferay, if you needed to inject variables
into themes, you were forced to create those variables in the `init.ftl` file of
every theme. This forced theme developers to keep that logic updated in every
theme version of every theme they developed. With context contributors, you can
inject variables into existing frameworks without forcing theme developers to
update their `init.ftl` files.

$$$

The `prepare` method above also determines whether to show the Product Menu or
not with the following if statement:

    if (!isShowProductMenu(request)) {
        return;
    }

The `isShowProductMenu(...)` method injects functionality into the theme's
context by providing an option to show/hide the Product Menu. This method is
also included in the `ProductNavigationTemplateContextContributor` class:

    protected boolean isShowProductMenu(HttpServletRequest request) {
        ThemeDisplay themeDisplay = (ThemeDisplay)request.getAttribute(
            WebKeys.THEME_DISPLAY);

        if (themeDisplay.isImpersonated()) {
            return true;
        }

        if (!themeDisplay.isSignedIn()) {
            return false;
        }

        User user = themeDisplay.getUser();

        if (!user.isSetupComplete()) {
            return false;
        }

        return true;
    }

The `ProductNavigationTemplateContextContributor` provides an easy way to inject
variables into @product@'s theme directly related to the Product Menu. You can
do the same with your custom context contributor. With the power to inject
additional variables to any context in Liferay, you're free to fully harness the
power of your chosen templating language.

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Customizing the Product Menu](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/customizing-the-product-menu)

[Frontend Customizations](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/frontend-customizations)

[Theme Contributors](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/theme-contributors)
