# Working Smarter with Liferay Social Office
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-working-smarter-with-liferay-social-office-0)

Liferay Social Office is Liferay's social collaboration product for the
enterprise. Previously released as a separate product that was based on Liferay
Portal, it's now available as an application that can be installed on Liferay.
We are excited to bring both Social Office and this guide to you, in the hope
that you'll be able to use each to enable your teams to work together more
efficiently. 

Some time ago, we at Liferay were brainstorming some common use cases which
Liferay Portal does a good job solving. One of these is team-based
collaboration. Many of our customers have used Liferay Portal both inside their
enterprises and outside on the Internet to provide a better way of sharing
documents and data with the people they work with every day. Liferay Portal
provides a very flexible solution which allows you not only to do this, but
much, much more. Because Liferay Portal is so flexible, the path from the
initial install to a robust web site that could be used for collaboration was
not always straightforward to the new user. The Social Office plugin is designed
to allow business users to set up and use Liferay Portal for collaboration right
away.

This was not the only reason for Social Office. Internally, we realized that we
needed a product like this ourselves. We knew that, in Liferay Portal, we
already had all the features in place to make it possible. We just needed to
assemble and extend them in a way that optimally supported the scenario of
social collaboration. We also wanted to make setup as easy as possible for new
users. In this way, Social Office was born. We created the product to provide
a simple, out of the box solution for team collaboration. Social Office provides
you with a fantastic array of features that you don't need to spend a lot of
time configuring. In fact, you can have a full production environment set up in
less time than it takes to brew a pot of coffee.

Social Office is a dynamic team collaboration solution for the enterprise that's
designed to streamline communication, save time, and raise productivity.
Organizations and groups can use Social Office to share resources, collaborate
on projects, and raise the visisbility of important activity. Social Office
features a robust suite of integrated, easy-to-use web applications. It's ready
to use right out of the box. Once installed, a quick setup wizard will help you
set up a team collaboration site so you can begin working immediately.

Since Social Office is provided as a plugin for Liferay Portal, it inherits all
the benefits of a mature, stable solution which has been in the marketplace for
some time. You can start using Social Office's straightforward, out-of-the box
collaborative features right away. You're also free to utilize any of the more
advanced features of Liferay Portal at any time. 

This guide is for those who are setting up and administering an instance of
Liferay Portal using Social Office. From installing Social Office to introducing
you to its entire feature set, we'll discuss all of the things you can do with
Social Office to help your team. We hope you'll use it as a tool to get Social
Office up, running, and integrated into your enterprise. You can find much more
information about installation and administration in *Using Liferay Portal*
[http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide).

If you need any assistance beyond what's covered in this book, Liferay, Inc.
offers training, consulting, and support services to fill any need that you
might have. Please see
[http://www.liferay.com/services](http://www.liferay.com/services) for further
information about the services we can provide.  As always, we welcome any
feedback. If there is any way you think we could make this book better, please
feel free to mention it on our forums. You can also use any of the email
addresses on our Contact Us page
[http://www.liferay.com/contact_us](http://www.liferay.com/contact_us). We are
here to serve you, our users and customers, and to help make your experience
using Social Office the best it can be. 

## Introduction [](id=lp-2-0-soen01-introduction-0)

"Help!"

This has been the cry of information workers everywhere who have tried to manage
complex projects through email and shared folders. You've probably had a similar
experience: you're collaborating on a document with a team of people and are
emailing it back and forth. Person A creates the initial document and Person
B replies with some edits. Person C replies with additional edits at the same
time Person A replies with the corrections from Person B. Person D takes this
and rewrites a whole section of the document while Person B and C respond to
Person A's update. Pretty soon, it becomes very difficult to determine which
document is the latest document.

The same scenario plays itself out when working in shared folders. Person
A creates a document and puts it in a network share. Person B edits the document
and saves it under a different file name. Person C edits it and re-saves the
original. Person A tries to reconcile the two, while Person D opens Person B's
document and saves yet another version. Before you know it, you have the same
problem you had with email: you can't tell which document is the latest
document. Additionally, you have a worse problem: you don't have a clear history
of how the document got to where it is in the first place. 

"Help!"

The Liferay Social Office plugin for Liferay Portal is designed to answer this
call for help by meeting the needs of teams who work together on projects. It's
easy to set up and makes it easier to facilitate collaboration for large and
small businesses alike. With Liferay Social Office, you'll have the system and
your workgroups up and running in no time, with all the tools necessary for them
to work more efficiently and more easily than before.

## Installation [](id=lp-2-0-soen01-installation-0)

Unlike previous versions of Social Office, Social Office 2.0 is available as an
application that can be installed on Liferay Portal 6.1. Liferay applications,
or apps, are packages of Liferay plugins that are grouped together with
descriptions, version information, and other metadata. You can identify
downloaded Liferay apps by their `.lpkg` file extenstions. They're available
from Liferay Marketplace at
[http://www.liferay.com/marketplace](http://www.liferay.com/marketplace). Prior
to version 2.0, Social Office was provided as an independent product that was
based on, but separate from, Liferay Portal.

To install Social Office manually, you just need to deploy the Social Office
`.lpkg` file to your Liferay installation. The Social Office `.lpkg` file is
hot-deployable and includes the following Liferay plugins: 

- contacts-portlet
- events-display-portlet
- microblogs-portlet
- private-messaging-portlet
- resource-importer
- so-hook
- so-portlet
- so-theme
- so-welcome-theme
- tasks-portlet
- wysiwyg-portlet

---

![Figure 1.1: Tip](../../images/tip.png) **Warning:** Social Office 2.0 is
incompatible with 7 Cogs, the sample website that comes pre-installed with
Liferay bundles. You need to remove 7 Cogs from your Liferay installation before
installing Social Office. This is very easy to do. For a Tomcat bundle, just
navigate to `<Liferay Home>/tomcat-<version>/webapps` and remove the
`seven-cogs-hook` folder. For other application server bundles, navigate to the
directory where web applications are installed and remove the `seven-cogs-hook`
folder. Please refer to chapter 11 of Using Liferay Portal at
[http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/installing-liferay-on-an-existing-application-server](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/installing-liferay-on-an-existing-application-server)
if you're not sure where the web applications directory is on your application
server.

---

---

![Figure 1.2: Tip](../../images/tip.png) **Warning:** When you start Liferay for
the first time, you're presented with a setup wizard. The configuration you make
in the setup wizard is saved in a `portal-setup-wizard.properties` file in your
Liferay Home directory. However, if you specify a different Liferay Home
directory than the default in the setup wizard, the
`portal-setup-wizard.properties` file that's saved there will not be read upon
restarting your server. To have Liferay read your
`portal-setup-wizard.properties` file, create a `portal-ext.properties` file in
your new Liferay Home directory and add the following line to it, where
`${liferay.home}` is the new Liferay Home directory that you chose:

    include-and-override=${liferay.home}/portal-setup-wizard.properties

Without this workaround, Liferay will not read the
`portal-setup-wizard.properties` file with your saved configuration when you
restart your server and you'll see the setup wizard again. Furthermore, Social
Office will not be redeployed and won't be functional. This means that the
Dashboard button on the dockbar won't show up. If you manually navigate to the
dashboard URL, you see the pages but they'll be unthemed and the portlets will
be greyed out with a message stating that they've been undeployed. 

---

### Installation peculiarities for specific apps servers
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-installation-peculiarities-for-specific-apps-servers-0)

After installing Social Office on Glassfish, you need to restart the server
before Social Office will be fully deployed. If you don't restart, Glassfish
doesn't recognize the so-hook and the hook won't be available. Once you've
restarted the server, the so-hook deployment completes as expected.

For JBoss, you have to restart the server in order to see the Dashboard link. If
you don't restart the server, the Dashboard link won't appear although you can
find other content added by Social Office if you use the *Go To* &rarr; *My
Public/My Private Pages* menu. To fix this issue, simply restart your server.

### Uninstalling Social Office [](id=lp-2-0-soen01-uninstalling-social-office-0)

If you'd like to uninstall Social Office, you can do so from the *Purchased*
page of the control panel, under the Marketplace heading. However, after you've
uninstalled Social Office from Marketplace, you need to manually revert the
friendly URL of the Welcome page. 

![Figure 1.3: After uninstalling Social Office from Marketplace, you need to
manually revert the friendly URL of the Welcome
page.](../../images/site_pages_welcome_sologin.png)

Otherwise, the portal will always be looking for the `/so/login` page which no
longer exists since the hook is gone. This will produce a number of errors in
the log and once you log out, you won't be able to log in again.

## Managing the Social Office welcome theme
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-managing-the-social-office-welcome-theme-0)

The Social Office welcome theme and resource importer are included in the Social
Office 2.0 package available from Marketplace. The Social Office welcome theme
provides a clean login screen for Social Office when Social Office 2.0 is
installed on a fresh portal instance.

![Figure 1.4: The Social Office 2.0 welcome theme provides a clean and
attractive login screen.](../../images/so-welcome-theme1.png)

A fresh portal instance is an installation of Liferay Portal whose guest site
(default liferay.com site) has not yet been modified. If the guest site has not
been modified, the default theme of the guest site is replaced by the Social
Office welcome theme. The Social Office welcome theme requires the so-hook and
the resource-importer, which is why the resource-importer is also included in
the Social Office package. 

Note that the Social Office welcome theme is not intended for customization.
It's simply intended to provide a simple login screen.  If you try to customize
a page it's been applied to, you'll find that it hides the edit controls from
administrators. If you'd like to customize your portal's login page, you should
first remove the Social Office welcome theme. To do so, follow these steps:

1. Undeploy the Social Office welcome theme (so-welcome-theme).
2. Navigate to the Control Panel &rarr; Sites and select Actions &rarr; Edit
   Settings on the guest site.
3. Set the Application Adapter field to none.

![Figure 1.6: Editing the default site's
settings](../../images/so-welcome-theme2.png)

4. Set the theme of the site back to the classic theme or to your theme of
   choice.

![Figure 1.7: Editing the default site's
settings](../../images/so-welcome-theme3.png)

If you'd like to install the SO welcome theme when the guest site has already
been modified, you can follow these instructions:

First, you have to revert the guest site back to its original state when you
first installed Liferay Portal. This means that the guest site should only
contain one page and the page should only have the Sign In portlet and the Hello
World portlet. For Liferay Portal 6.1.1, a regular portal welcome theme is
deployed by default. That means that you'll need to take the following steps: 

1. Undeploy the portal welcome theme.
2. Delete all other pages ,
3. Make sure the first page of the guest site only has the Sign In and Hello
   World portlets. 
4. Deploy the Social Office welcome theme (so-welcome-theme).

This way, the Social Office welcome theme will be applied to the portal home
page.

---

![Figure 1.5: Tip](../../images/tip.png) **Warning:** Installing the Social
Office welcome theme overwrites any pages and customizations that have already
been made to the guest site.

---

Next, let's discuss how Social Office facilitates team collaboration.

## What can you do with Social Office?
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-what-can-you-do-with-social-office-0)

Social Office gives you the social collaboration features you need to do virtual
teamwork. You can coordinate calendars and schedules, write shared blog entries,
work together on documents, discuss issues in forums, document everything in
a wiki, and more. The underlying theme is that all discussion and collaboration
is kept with the asset. What does this mean? It means that the asset, whether
that be a document, a thread, a blog entry, or a wiki article is the star around
which all of the discussion and collaboration orbits. 

Trying to collaborate on assets through email or server shares works up to
a certain point--but then it fails because it's a backwards way of doing the
work. The asset in that scenario becomes secondary, and the "wrapper"--email or
the share--becomes the primary target of the work. So instead of concentrating
on the asset which the team is trying to produce, the focus turns to the
wrapper. In the case of a shared folder, you might manually rename documents
according to a numbering scheme so everyone can tell which is the latest--that
is, until someone forgets to do so, or until someone accidentally overwrites the
latest document. In the case of email, users try to navigate huge threads while
passing an asset back and forth--until someone forgets to "reply all" or until
someone starts a new thread (and maybe forgets to put the whole list on the
thread). Working in the mediums of shared folders or email puts the focus on
working with the wrapper, not the asset. And so the asset gets lost because
they're forced to focus on the wrapper instead of the asset. With Social Office,
you'll be free to concentrate on the assets--the system gets out of your way so
that it's a simple matter for your team to work together. 

## What features does Social Office add to Liferay Portal?
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-what-features-does-social-office-add-to-liferay-portal-0)

Liferay Portal is a full featured web portal, containing an industry-leading
suite of built-in applications and tools. It's highly customizable and
businesses use it to run major web sites all over the world. We've optimized
Liferay Portal for creating state-of-the art, robust web sites that serve
millions of users every day. 

Social Office adds functionality for a specific purpose: collaboration. We've
designed it for work groups needing to collaborate on documents and data in the
office. The additional tools and defaults were carefully chosen to provide users
working within a group the ability to easily communicate, collaborate, and
coordinate their tasks.

Social Office adds extra collaborative tools to Liferay and allows you to
quickly set up sites designed to facilitate collaboration. Each site is designed
to provide a single group or team with a virtual shared workspace. Members of
your organization who belong to multiple groups or teams in your organization
can belong to multiple Social Office sites on the portal. Social Office also
provides each user with customized sets of public and private pages for their
personal sites. These personal sites serve as virtual individual workspaces. The
applications they include help users manage their tasks, keep informed about
each other's activities, and communicate with each other.

Whether you're creating a public web site and need the full features of an
unparalleled, industry-leading engine or you're creating a small corporate
Intranet, Liferay Portal is the ideal solution for you. You should consider
installing the Social Office plugin if you'd like your site to facilitate
communication between people within specific groups and accomplish tasks using
shared virtual workspaces with minimal set up and administration.

The Social Office theme adds a convenient button to the top-right corners of
Social Office pages. This button allows you to expand the portlets on the page
to fit the size of your browser window. You can click the button again to return
the portlets to their default size. In addition to the standard Social Office
theme, there's another theme for Social Office's Welcome page.

### Using the Social Office User role and personal sites
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-using-the-social-office-user-role-and-personal-sites-0)

The Social Office plugin adds a special role to Liferay Portal: Social Office
User. Assigning users to the Social Office User role provides them with personal
sites pre-built with pages and applications designed to help them manage their
work, share information, and communicate with each other. Assign yourself to the
Social Office User role to see how it works. Once your user account has been
granted the Social Office User role, a *Dashboard* link appears in the dockbar.
Now you can explore the extra features added to Liferay by Social Office.

If all your portal users will be using Social Office, you should add this role
to your portal's default user associations. Use the *Go to* menu of the Dockbar
to navigate to the Control Panel. Under the Portal heading, click on *Portal
Settings*. Then click on *Users* from the right-hand navigation menu. Finally,
open the *Default User Associations* tab and add the role *Social Office User*.
Now, newly created users will be assigned to the Social Office User role. If
you've been using Liferay but have just installed Social Office, you can check
the *Apply to Existing Users* box to grant the Social Office User role to
previously created users. These users will receive the role the next time they
log in to the portal.

The default personal pages provided by the Social Office user role include the
private Dashboard page and the public Profile page. When a user who has been
assigned to the Social Office User role logs in, several changes are made to his
or her Dockbar. First, a *Dashboard* link appears to the right of the *Go to*
menu.  You can click this link from anywhere in the portal to go to your virtual
private workspace. Second, a *Notifications* button is added to the right of the
Dashboard link. The Notifications button displays how many unread notifications
you have. You'll be notified upon receiving a private message, an invitation to
join a site, a social connection request, or an event reminder. Lastly, the
right-most item of the Dockbar becomes a drop-down list containing a link to
your public *Profile* page as well as a link your *My Account* page of the
control panel and the *Sign Out* link.

#### Using the Dashboard and other private pages
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-using-the-dashboard-and-other-private-pages-0)

The private page sets of Social Office users serve as personal workspaces. Each
private page displays a navigation menu and the Sites portlet in the left column
so that you can navigate back and forth between the private pages of your
personal site, navigate to your public pages, or navigate to one of the other
sites you belong to. The private pages provided by Social Office include:

- Dashboard
- Contacts Center
- Microblogs
- Messages
- My Documents
- Tasks

![Figure 1.8: The Dashboard navigation menu contains links to each private page
of your personal site as well as a link to your public Profile page. Clicking
the Social Office logo takes you to your
Dashboard.](../../images/dashboard-menu.png)

The Sites portlet is an improved version of the basic My Sites portlet. It
allows you to star various sites to customize your sites list. You can select
*All Sites* to display all the sites in the portal, *My Sites* to display all
the sites you belong to, or *My Favorites* to display your custom list of
starred sites. The option to star sites is very useful for large Social Office
instances with web applications and content hosted across many different sites.
There's also a search bar which you can use to display sites related to your
search query. If you have permission to add sites, you'll see an *Add Site*
button which opens a wizard to guide you through the site creation process. This
wizard will create a new site based on the *Default Social Office Site*
template. This site comes pre-built with pages and applications designed for
team collaboration. The *More Sites* button opens a site directory dialog box
which you can use to join, leave sites, or star sites. If you have the required
permissions, you can also delete sites.

![Figure 1.9: The Sites portlet lets you customize your sites list and create
new Social Office sites with a simple wizard.](../../images/sites-portlet.png)

The Dashboard page provides several portlet applications designed to keep you up
to date with various kinds of portal activity:

- Activities
- Upcoming Tasks
- Events
- Microblogs Status Update

Using the power of Liferay's Social API, the Activities portlet presents
information about different categories of users' recent activities. Use the tabs
to display portal activities from different scopes: *Connections* shows a list
of activities from users you have established a social connection with,
*Following* shows activities from users you're following, and *My Sites* shows
all the activities from sites you belong to. You can also select *Me* to view
just your own activites. The Upcoming Tasks portlet displays a list of tasks
that have been created for you or that you've assigned to yourself. The Events
portlet integrates with the calendar portlet belonging to your scope to show
upcoming events for the next few days. There's also a Microblogs Status Update
portlet on your Dashboard which lets you broadcast a Facebook-like status to the
scope of your choice: to everyone, to your connections, or to your followers.
Next, let's take a look at the applications provided on the other private pages
of Social Office users' personal sites.

![Figure 1.10: The default Dashboard applications are designed to inform you
about recent portal activities and upcoming events, and to help you manage your
personal tasks.](../../images/dashboard-applications.png)

The Contacts Center is an important application for Social Office because it
allows users to create LinkedIn-style connections and Twitter-style followers.
This enables users to customize who they share information about social
activities with and whose activity they're interested in. The Contacts Center
application displays a list of portal users. You can choose to display *All*,
*Connections*, or *Following* and you can also search for specific users. Select
a user from the left-hand area of the Contacts Center portlet to view details
about him or her. For each user, you'll have the following options:

- *Add as Connection* sends a connection request to the selected user.
- *Follow/Unfollow* subscribes and unsubscribes you to the selected user's
  activities stream.
- *Block/Unblock* allows you to block and unblock users from viewing your
  activities stream. As of Social Office 2.0, blocking a user only prevents that
  user from following you or adding you as a connection. A blocked user can
  still send messages to and view the public profile information of the blocking
  user. 
- *Export vCard* lets you export a user's vCard and save it as a VCF file. vCard
  is a file format standard for electronic business cards.
- *Go to Profile* is a link to the selected user's public profile page.

![Figure 1.11: Contacts Centers allows users to follow each other Twitter-style
and set up Linked-In style connections.](../../images/contacts-center.png)

Social Office's Microblogs application allows you to broadcast your thoughts as
a Facebook-like status to a chosen audience. You can choose for your status to
be viewable by *All*, *Connections*, or *Followers*. There are two special
symbols that you can use in your microblog posts. The hashtag symbol (`#`) turns
the following word into a hashtag. When viewing a microblog post, hashtags
appear as links. You can click on any hashtag to view a list of microblog posts
that reference the same hashtag. Note that hashtags are distinct from portal
tags--only portal tags are indexed and made available for search. The other
special symbol you can use is the mentions symbol (`@`). When you are writing
a microblog post, typing the `@` symbol brings up a list of connections to
select. Once you select a connection and publish your post, the connection's
username becomes a link to their Social Office profile page. This is the general
behavior of clicking on a username throughout Social Office. The Timeline tab of
the Microblogs portlet chronologically displays all the status posts that you
have permission to see. The Mentions tab displays all the posts in which you've
been mentioned.

![Figure 1.12: Microblogs allow users to broadcast their thoughts to a chosen
audience.](../../images/microblogs.png)

Note that there are two different portlets for accessing the microblogs system:
the Microblogs portlet and the Microblogs Status Update portlet. When placed on
private pages, both portlets allow you to update your mircoblogs status. The
Microblogs portlet also allows you to view your Microblogs Timeline and Mentions
tabs. On public pages, these portlets display microblogs but don't allow you to
publish new posts. You wouldn't want to just anyone to publish microblogs under
your name, would you?

Social Office's private messaging system allows you to send email-like messages
to other users within the portal. Its interface is similar to that of an email
client. You can select messages to mark them as read or unread or mark them for
deletion. Use the *New Message* button to compose a new message. Just like with
email, you can enter a subject, a message body, and add attachments. Open the
dropdown menu next to the *To* field to select a user or users to send your
message to. You can select any number of users.

![Figure 1.13: The Private Messaging Interface functions just like an email
client for use within a Social Office
instance.](../../images/private-messaging.png)

Social Office provides a private document library to each Social Office user.
Users can navigate to it by clicking the *My Documents* link in the Dashboard
navigation menu. The Documents and Media portlet on the My Documents page is
exactly the same as the standard Documents and Media portlet that ships with
Liferay Portal. Please refer to chapter 4 of Liferay's User Guide for
information about document management: [Document
Management](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/documents-and-med-1)

![Figure 1.14: The Documents and Media portlet on the My Documents page is
exactly the same as the standard Documents and Media portlet that ships with
Liferay Portal. To optimize the Social Office user experience, set up your users
with Liferay Sync.](../../images/so-document-library.png)

With their private document libraries, each of your Social Office users can
maintain a personal online repository of documents and files. Your users can use
all the features of Liferay 6.1's revamped document library, including document
previews, document types, metadata sets, and version history. However, your
users can simplify the way they access their document repositories by installing
Liferay Sync. Liferay Sync allows users to view and edit documents offline using
their regular desktop or mobile environments. Users' documents are synced with
your Liferay server at periodic intervals. You can read more about Liferay Sync
in chapter 4 of Liferay's User Guide here: [Liferay
Sync](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/lp-6-1-ugen04-liferay-sync-0).

The Tasks system allows you and your team members to keep track of different
tasks that you're working on. Tasks related to specific projects can be tagged
as such and you can use the *Filter* button at the top right corner of the
portlet to filter tasks by tag or by site. Use the *Add Task* button at the top
left to create new tasks. You can enter a description of the task, choose an
assignee from your contacts (or assign to yourself), select a priority, and,
optionally, enter a due date. It's also helpful, especially when there are large
numbers of tasks, to tag your tasks. 

![Figure 1.15: The Tasks portlet lets you create tasks and assign them to
yourself or others. You can view tasks that have been assigned to you and tasks
that you've created.](../../images/tasks-portlet.png)

The *Permissions* button at the top left of the Tasks portlet lets you choose
which roles grant permission to add new tasks or edit existing ones.

#### Using the Profile page and other public pages
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-using-the-profile-page-and-other-public-pages-0)

You can access your public Profile page from the Dashboard by clicking on your
name, which appears above the page navigation menu in the left column. Your
public pages are laid out and styled the same way as the Dashboard and the rest
of the private pages. Users' default public sites contain three pages,
accessible from the left-column navigation menu:

- Profile
- Contacts
- Microblogs

In addition to the navigation menu, the left column of each page of a Social
Office user's public site contains a My Contacts portlet. This portlet allows
viewers of a user's public site to see all the user's contacts and lets them
navigate to any of the contacts' Profile pages.

![Figure 1.16: Users' Profile pages show relevant professional information,
contacts, and status updates.](../../images/profile-page.png)

By default, the Profile page displays several pieces of information about
a user: their profile and profile picture, their lastest microblog status, their
contacts, the sites they belong to, their tags, and their recent activities. The
Profile portlet is designed to display relevant professional information about
a user. A completed profile includes the following pieces of information:

- Introduction
- Phones
- Addresses
- Tags
- Email Address
- Websites
- Social Network
- SMS (Chat information)

There's also a button which allows you to export the user's vCard. Once you've
been granted a Social Office account, you need to access your own profile page
and fill out your profile information. If you're viewing your own Profile page,
there's an *Edit Profile* button which opens up your *My Account* page of the
control panel in a dialog box. Currently, you need to access your *My Account*
page of the control panel to update your profile picture.

If you're viewing another user's Profile page, the *Edit Profile* button is
replaced with buttons for adding or removing the user as a connection, following
or unfollowing a user, and blocking or unblocking a user. In addition to the
Profile, Microblogs Status Update, and Activites portlets, the Profile page also
contains Sites and Tags portlets to help with navigation. Note that when placed
on a public page, the Microblogs Status Update portlet does not allow you to
make updates--it just shows the lastest status update. You have to make status
updates from your private site.

The public Contacts and Microblogs applications have their own public pages.
These function the same way as the ones in a user's private site except that
other users can only view, not edit them. However, the Timeline tab of the
Microblogs portlet allows users to comment on entries.

### Using Social Office sites for collaboration
[](id=lp-2-0-soen01-using-social-office-sites-for-collaboration---0)

Social Office not only provides custom pages and applications for users'
personal sites but also for general sites that can have many members. A portal
administrator can use the *Add Site* button of the Sites portlet to add a new
site to use for team collaboration. This button opens a wizard which guides you
through the process of creating a site based on the *Default Social Office Site*
template. Sites based on this template come pre-built with pages and
applications designed for team collaboration, just like the default Social
Office personal sites come with applications designed to facilitate user
interaction. The default pages created by the wizard include the following:

- *Home*
- *Calendar*
- *Documents*
- *Forums*
- *Blog*
- *Wiki*
- *Members*

When creating a site, you can select a membership type: Open, Restricted, or
Private. Any portal user can join an open site. Portal users can request to join
a restricted site but must be approved by a site administrator. Private sites
are invisible to non-members; members must be invited by a site administrator.
By default, all the pages of an open Social Office site are public but
restricted and private Social Office site pages are private.

![Figure 1.17: The Social Office site wizard lets you quickly and easily set up
sites for team collaboration.](../../images/new-site-wizard1.png)

The Add Site wizard lets you choose which of default template pages you'd like
to include in your site. Links to these pages are embedded in the left-most
column of each page that belongs to the site.

![Figure 1.18: You can choose a site template to use to create your new site and
you can choose which template pages to
include.](../../images/new-site-wizard2.png)

When visiting an open Social Office site, users can use the *Join* link at the
top of the page to join the site. This link, along with the *My Sites* portlet
on the Dashboard, makes it very easy for Social Office users to manage their
site memberships. This, in turn, helps them keep abreast of the activites and
content that they're interested in. The *Join* link is replaced by a *Request
Membership* link for restricted sites. When users have requested membership for
a restricted site, the *Request Membership* link is replaced by a *Membership
Requested* notification to inform users that their request is pending.

![Figure 1.19: The *Join* link appears next to the Social Office logo at the top
of the page for Social Office sites.](../../images/join-site-link.png)

The Home page of the default Social Office site contains a number of useful
portlets. The Activities and Recent Downloads portlets keep site members up to
date about what's happening on the site and you can use the Announcements and
Events portlets to inform or remind site members about important information.
The Bookmarks portlet allows users to create a collection of useful links on
your site and you can configure the RSS portlet to display an RSS feed of your
choice. The Welcome portlet allows you to set up a custom welcome message for
your site. It's just a WYSIWYG portlet with its title changed to *Welcome*.

The Calendar, Documents, Forums, Blog, and Wiki pages contain portlet
applications that are automatically scoped for the site. This means that these
applications will each use a single data set to serve requests from multiple
members. So, while each Social Office member receives a personal Calendar
application and Documents and Media library on his or her personal site, site
members share Calendar applications and Documents and Media libraries for each
site they belong to. For more information about these applications, please refer
to Liferay's user guide, *Using Liferay Portal*, available at
[http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide). 

![Figure 1.20: Social Office's sites come with pre-build pages and applications
that facilitate team-based collaboration.](../../images/social-office-site.png)

In addition to the Blogs portlet, the Blogs page contains a Related Content
portlet. This portlet has a large number of possible configurations. By default,
it dynamically displays content belonging to the scope of the current site. The
Members page just contains a members portlet and an invitation portlet which can
be used to invite users to join the site.

Here's an example of how it all comes together: Ryan, Jim, and Michael are all
members of the Sales Site. Ryan schedules a meeting for the whole Sales team
about a new product launch and puts it on the Calendar. When Jim and Michael log
in, they both receive a notification of the meeting. Jim can't make the meeting,
but he's been maintaining the Sales Wiki for new products, so he asks Michael to
update it for him after the meeting.

Michael updates the Wiki with the new information after the meeting, and Ryan
posts a summary of what happened in the meeting in the Sales Blog. When Jim logs
in the next day, he'll receive a notification of the new Blog post with the
information he missed, as well as a notification about the updated Wiki.
Additionally, he can easily access those pages to catch up on what he missed.
This works because Social Office automatically keeps everyone up to date on the
activities of the teams they work with every day.

## Upgrade Process [](id=lp-2-0-soen01-upgrade-process-0)

Social Office 1.5b runs on Liferay Portal 5.2.7. If you're running Social Office
1.5b and you'd like to upgrade to 2.0, you first need to upgrade your portal to
version 6.1.1 CE. Please see the Upgrading Liferay section in chapter 17 of
Liferay's User Guide for details about Liferay's upgrade process:
[http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide).
Before starting the the following Social Office upgrade process, make sure
you've already upgraded your portal to version 6.1.1 CE, and backed up your old
`portal-ext.properties` file, data folder, and database.

1. In your new 6.1.1 portal bundle, add the following properties into your
   `portal-ext.properties` file:

   5.2.7 uses permission algorithm 5 (comment out once data migration is
   complete).
   
    permissions.user.check.algorithm=5
    permissions.view.dynamic.inheritance=false

   6.1.1 uses permission algorithm 6 (comment in once data migration is
   complete).
   
    permissions.user.check.algorithm=6
    permissions.view.dynamic.inheritance=false

   The following property ensures that the document library uses the same
   storage method.
   
    dl.hook.impl=com.liferay.documentlibrary.util.FileSystemHook

   You do not want to index on startup/upgrade, so make sure reindex is disabled
   when you deploy the Social Office packager.
   
    index.on.startup=false index.on.upgrade=false

   Point Liferay to data folder of SO 1.5 (this may be different then your new
   data folder).
   
    resource.repositories.root={your data folder}

   The following values are taken from the default 5.2 legacy properties in the
   portal folder.
   
    Default 5.2 users.image.max.height=0 users.image.max.width=0

    locale.prepend.friendly.url.style=0

    auth.token.check.enabled=false

    image.hook.impl=com.liferay.portal.image.DatabaseHook

    cdn.host.http=${cdn.host} cdn.host.https=${cdn.host}

    virtual.hosts.default.community.name=

    breadcrumb.show.guest.group=false breadcrumb.show.parent.groups=false

    wiki.page.titles.regexp=([^/\\\\\\[\\]%&?@]+)
    wiki.page.titles.remove.regexp=([/\\\\\\[\\]%&?@]+)
	
2. Make sure that your root directory is set to SO 1.5's root directory and that
   permission algorithm 5 is being used.

3. Start up your application server. (Your permission algorithm must be set to
   5.)

4. After the upgrade has completed and your portal is running, log in as an
   administrator and navigate to Control Panel &rarr; Server Administration
   &rarr; Data Migration.

5. Flag *Generate Custom Roles*.

6. Click *Execute* to update the permission alogrithm.

7. Shut down your application server.

8. In your `portal-ext.properties` file, comment out permission algorithm 5 and
   comment in permission algorithm 6.

9. Start your application server back up.

10. Deploy the Social Office 2.0 Packager or install Social Office 2.0 through
    Liferay Marketplace.

11. Check that all previous content and files are accessible and present.
