# Pricing [](id=pricing)

On its most basic level, pricing is handled in the catalog [link]. When all you
want to do is assign one price to one SKU, that's all you need. But sometimes
you may want to do something a little more sophisticated, and that's where
*discounts* and *price lists* are useful. The basic distinction between these
two features is simple: discounts are special prices only for specified periods
of time, while price lists offer discounts only to specified groups of
customers.

If you want to offer a special price on a certain product, but only to customers
who also make other specified purchases, look into Grouped Products [link].

## Discounts [](id=discounts)

<!--I assume discounts are for when you want to offer a special price on certain
products for a specified period of time. Is there a coupon code function?-->

## Price Lists [](id=price-lists)

Price lists allow you to specify a group of customers to receive special
pricing. This allows you to implement separate prices for organization members,
offer employee discounts, and the like. When you create a price list, you first
identify the users to whom it will apply, and then select products and enter the
prices those users will see.

<!--Is there a way to apply a blanket price adjustment as a percentage of the
base price? Or do all price changes have to be applied manually to one product
at a time?-->

### Creating Price Lists [](id=creating-price-lists)

To create a price list, go to *Site Menu* &rarr; *Commerce* &rarr; *Price
Lists*, and click the *Add* button (![Add](../images/icon-add.png)). In
the form that displays, give your price list a name, select a currency and
a priority, and--if you want--enter the time frame in which the list will apply.

You also need to specify who qualifies to use this price list. Under
*Qualification Type*, click *Select* and choose how you want to identify users
(by Organization, User Group, or Role). To select users individually by name,
choose *Users*. You can select more than one option.

Once you've made your selections and hit publish, a tab bar appears at the top
of the page. Open these tabs to add products and users to the list.

![Figure 1: The tab bar for this price list is configured to allow qualified users to be specified by organization, user group, and role, but not individually.](../images/price-list.png)

### Adding Entries to Price Lists [](id=adding-entries-to-price-lists)

To add entries to a price list, simply click on the *Entries* and check the box
next to each SKU you want to include. After you make your selections and click
*Add*, set the price for each SKU individually by clicking Options
(![Options](../images/icon-options.png)) &rarr; *Edit* and filling in the
*Price* field. 

+$$$

There are two ways to add entries to a price list. Besides using the
method just described, you can also add a product from the SKU tab in its
catalog entry [link to doc]. In general, the method described on this page is
more efficient for adding a large number of products to a new list. When
creating a new product, however, it is usually easier to add it to existing
price lists from the Catalog's SKU tab.

$$$

### Adding Users to Price Lists [](id=adding-users-to-price-lists)

To add a User, User Group, Organization or role to a price List, select the
appropriate tab and click on the ![Add](../images/icon-add.png) button and
select whichever users or user collections suit your purposes. All the members
of those groups are now able to purchase products at the special price list
rate.
