# Notifying and Drawing Attention to Users by Mentioning Them [](id=notifying-and-drawing-attention-to-users-by-mentioning-them)

Have you ever wanted to link to a user's home page in the middle of a blog entry
or Message Boards message in which you're praising them? Have you ever wanted to
notify specific colleagues in an important comment you were adding to site
content? With the Mentions portlet, you can *mention* (notify and/or draw
attention to) friends and colleagues by entering the "@" character followed by
their user name. When you mention a user, the user receives an in-portal
notification and email--both link to the content that includes the mention. You
can mention users in a blog entry, a Message Boards message, or comment; you can
mention them from any application that uses Liferay's comments feature. What's
more, in the content of a blog entry or Message Boards message, each user
mention links to that user's home page. 

![Figure 1: By using the *mention* syntax in a blog entry, Message Boards message, or comment, you can link to a user's home page and notify the user with an email.](../../images/mentions-in-comment.png)

The Mentions feature works as you'd expect. While editing comments or content,
enter an "@" character followed by the *user name* of the user you're mentioning
(e.g., *@joe.bloggs*). A selector appears, listing users that match the name
you're entering. In the selector, each user is represented by his/her profile
picture, name, and user name. Click on the user you want to mention and finish
editing your content. On publishing the content, the mentioned users receive an
in-portal notification and an email, informing them that they've been mentioned.
The notification and email indicate the author's name and content's type, and
they link to the content. 

![Figure 2: The Notifications portlet informs you when and where you're mentioned.](../../images/mentions-notifications.png)

Here's an example notification email message:

	Dear Joe Bloggs,

	Neil Armstrong mentioned you in the following comment:

	----------
	I bet @joe would like visiting the moon.
	----------

	View comment.(link)

	Sincerely,
	Kim Admin
	kim.admin@lunarresort.com 

To set up the Mentions portlet, download and install it from the [Liferay
Marketplace](https://www.liferay.com/marketplace). The mentions feature is
enabled globally by default, but you can enable/disable it globally and per
site. In order for a site to have Mentions enabled, Mentions must be enabled for
the site's portal. You can access the Mentions control screen by clicking the
*Mentions* link in the Configuration category in Portal Settings. A site's
Mentions administration screen can be accessed by clicking the *Mentions* link
in the Advanced section of Site Settings. Note that any user can mention any
other user.

By mentioning users you can get their attention, praise them with kudos, and
link to their home pages. And did I *mention* that the portlet is available on
EE and CE? Have fun collaborating and socializing with the Mentions portlet,
today! 
