# Displaying Product Categories [](id=displaying-product-categories)

Users have two main options for displaying the contents of a category on a page.
You can manually create a category display page for each category, or you can
create a single page to display content dynamically depending on which category
a customer selects.

There are advantages to both approaches: creating pages individually has the
obvious benefit of permitting greater customization, but using a single default
page is significantly less labor intensive. Fortunately, you don't have to
choose: you can use a default page to set certain standards for appearance and
consistency, and then override the default with a custom page for any categories
on which you want to lavish more attention.

Once your categories have pages attached to them, the Category Navigation
Application can be used to help buyers easily find the products they want.

## Creating Individual Pages [](id=creating-individual-pages)

Manually creating a category page is easy. Just 
[create a page][discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/creating-and-managing-pages] 
and then go to *Site Menu* &rarr; *Content* &rarr; *Categories*, find the
category you want to create a page for, and click
![Options](../../images/icon-add.png) &rarr; *Edit*. Then click on the *Category
Display Page* tab, hit *Choose* and select the page you just created.

## Creating a Default Page [](id=creating-a-default-page)



# Commerce Category Navigation [](id=commerce-category-navigation)

The commerce category navigation app presents users with a tree of navigation
options that matches categories defined by the site. Rather than requiring the
user to define a separate site for each link, commerce category app requires
just one page which it will populate with search results appropriate to the
selected category.

## Laying the Groundwork [](id=laying-the-groundwork)

The first thing to do is create a page for for the category navigation portlet
to access. Once you've created and named a page, add Category Content and Search
Results portlets to the page. To give customers an opportunity 

