# Managing Image Resolutions [](id=managing-image-resolutions)

Adaptive Media lets you manage image resolutions and their resulting adapted 
images. For example, you can disable, enable, edit, and delete resolutions. You 
can also generate any adapted images that may be missing for a resolution. This 
article discusses these topics and more. 

## Disabling Image Resolutions [](id=disabling-image-resolutions)

Disabling an image resolution prevents it from generating adapted images. Any 
images uploaded after the resolution is disabled use the most appropriate 
resolution that is still active. Adapted images previously generated by the 
disabled resolution are still available. 

To disable an image resolution, click its *Actions* menu 
(![Actions](../../../../images/icon-actions.png)) and select *Disable*. 

## Enabling Image Resolutions [](id=enabling-image-resolutions)

Image resolutions are enabled by default. But if you need to enable a disabled 
resolution, click that resolution's *Actions* menu 
(![Actions](../../../../images/icon-actions.png)) and select *Enable*. 

Note that while a resolution is disabled, it doesn't generate adapted images for 
new image uploads. After enabling a resolution, you should generate the adapted 
images that weren't generated while it was disabled (see the 
[Generating Missing Image Resolutions](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/managing-image-resolutions#generating-missing-image-resolutions) 
section for instructions on this). 

## Editing Image Resolutions [](id=editing-image-resolutions)

You can't edit an image resolution that already has adapted images. This 
prevents odd behavior (of the adapted images--you're still free to be as odd as 
you want). For example, if you could change the values of a resolution that 
already had adapted images, those images wouldn't be regenerated for the new 
values. Adaptive Media would then use the resolution's new values to generate 
adapted images for any newly uploaded images, resulting in two sets of images 
for that resolution--odd indeed. 

Therefore, editing an image resolution is only possible if Adaptive Media hasn't 
yet generated adapted images for it. If you need to change the values of a 
resolution that already has adapted images, you must delete that resolution and 
create a new one with the new values. The next section discusses deleting 
resolutions. 

## Deleting Image Resolutions [](id=deleting-image-resolutions)

Before deleting an image resolution, make sure that you really want to delete 
it. When you delete an image resolution, its adapted images are also deleted and 
can no longer be used or referenced in any content. Also, you can't undo the 
deletion of a resolution. 

Follow these steps to delete an image resolution:

1.  Disable the resolution. You can't delete enabled resolutions. This prevents 
    the accidental deletion of image resolutions. 

2.  To delete the resolution and all its adapted images, select *Delete* from 
    the resolution's Actions menu 
    (![Actions](../../../../images/icon-actions.png)). 

## Generating Missing Adapted Images [](id=generating-missing-image-resolutions)

There may be cases where Adaptive Media hasn't generated all the images you need 
for one or more image resolutions. For example, when a resolution is disabled, 
it doesn't generate adapted images. To generate adapted images for images 
uploaded while it was disabled, you must enable it and then manually generate 
the missing adapted images. Similarly, Adaptive Media doesn't generate adapted 
images for images uploaded prior to a resolution's creation; you must manually 
generate the missing adapted images. 

![Figure 1: The *Adapted Images* column shows the percentage of images that are adapted for each resolution. ](../../../../images/adaptive-media-coverage.png)

There are two ways to manually generate missing adapted images:

1.  To do so for a resolution, select *Adapt Remaining* from the resolution's 
    Actions menu 
    (![Actions](../../../../images/icon-actions.png)). 

2.  To do so for all resolutions at once, select *Adapt All Images* from the 
    Actions menu in the Control Menu at the top of the page. 

## The Recycle Bin and Adapted Images [](id=recycling-adapted-images)

You can't explicitly move adapted images to the Recycle Bin. But if the original 
image is in the Recycle Bin, the corresponding adapted images behave as if they 
are in the Recycle Bin and users can't view them. 

+$$$

**Note:** URLs that point to adapted images whose original image is in the 
Recycle Bin return an error code of `404 Not Found`.

$$$

If the original image is restored from the Recycle Bin, the adapted images are 
accessible again.

Awesome! Now you know how to manage image resolutions in Adaptive Media. Next, 
you'll learn about creating content with adapted images. 
