# Querying for Content [](id=querying-for-content)

The Asset Publisher is a highly configurable application that lets you query for
mixed types of content on the fly. By giving you the ability to control what and
how content is displayed from one location, the Asset Publisher helps you to
"bubble up" the most relevant content to your users.

To get to all the application's options, click the *Options* icon
(![Options](../../../../images/icon-options.png)) in the application's menu. If you
click the *Configuration* option and then *Setup* (if necessary), you can
configure the Asset Publisher's settings from the following three areas:

- Asset Selection
- Display Settings
- Subscriptions

Asset Selection allows you to configure which assets are displayed. You can set
asset selection to either *Dynamic* or *Manual*. With dynamic asset selection,
assets are automatically displayed based on certain rules or filters. For
example, you can set the Asset Publisher to display only assets of a certain
type or assets to which certain tags or categories have been applied. With
manual asset selection, the Asset Publisher only displays assets that have been
explicitly selected by an administrator.

The Asset Publisher supports a scope that restricts both dynamic and manual
asset selection. The Asset Publisher can only display assets from its configured
scope. By default, the Asset Publisher app is scoped to the site of the page to
which it was added. You can, however, customize the scope from the Asset
Selection section of the Asset Publisher configuration window. To extend your
Asset Publisher's scope:

1.  Click *Select* under Scope

2.  Choose either *Global* to add the global scope, *Pages...* to add the scope to specific pages, or *Other Site...* to add the scope of anther site.

The Display Settings section of the Asset Publisher configuration window lets
administrators customize many details that determine how content is displayed.
The Subscription section allows administrators to enable, disable, or configure
email subscriptions and RSS subscriptions. In the following sections, you'll
explore the available configurations for the Asset Selection, Display Settings,
and Subscriptions sections of the Asset Publisher's configuration window. You'll
start by learning how select content manually. You'll see that it's very similar
to using the Web Content Display application except that you can select assets
of any type, not just web content articles. 
