# Extending Form Navigators with New Sections and Categories [](id=extending-form-navigators-with-new-sections-and-categories)

Do you want to provide pages for configuring your app's global and site-specific
settings? Would you like to extend Liferay's user or organization settings pages
to add custom forms? Since Liferay 7.0, the
[Form Navigator](/participate/liferaypedia/-/wiki/Main/Form+Navigator)
framework enables you to dynamically add new sections and section categories to
existing form navigation. The framework includes a well-described API and a
powerful
[`liferay-ui`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/taglibs/liferay-ui)
tag called  [`form-navigator`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/taglibs/liferay-ui/form-navigator.html).
It's easy to use and facilitates organizing large forms into sections of input
and categories. Using form navigation, administrators can more easily find
forms, fill them in, and save form input. 

![Figure 1: The Form Navigator framework lets you add your app's configuration forms to existing form navigators, like the one used in Portal Settings.](../../images/form-navigator-portal-setting-extension.png)

This tutorial demonstrates adding a new navigation section (entry) to an
existing form navigator. It references source code from an example portlet
called the Form Nav Extension portlet. On GitHub, you can find its complete
project called
[form-nav-extension-portlet](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/tree/master/develop/tutorials/code/osgi/modules/form-nav-extension-portlet).
You can also download the Form Nav Extension portlet's bundle
`form-nav-extension-portlet-1.0.jar`. To download it, go to its GitHub
[page](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/blob/master/develop/tutorials/code/osgi/modules/form-nav-extension-portlet-1.0.jar)
and  click the *View Raw* link. 

+$$$

**Note**: Form navigator extensions implemented using portal properties and form
navigation entry JSPs are deprecated, but still supported, in Liferay 7.0. All
new form navigator extensions should be implemented as this tutorial describes. 

$$$

To add a new section entry to existing form navigation, follow these steps: 

1.  Add to your project's `bnd.bnd` file a unique web context path for your
    application. It allows your Java classes to reference your form input JSPs.
    Here's the web context path entry that's specified in the Form Nav Extension
    example portlet's `bnd.bnd` file:

        Web-ContextPath: /formnavextensionportlet

2.  Create a JSP that presents your app's configuration inputs. The Form Nav
    Extension portlet's JSP provides a checkbox input to enable or disable My
    App's feature in the portal: 

        <%@ taglib uri="http://java.sun.com/jsp/jstl/core" prefix="c" %>

        <%@ taglib uri="http://liferay.com/tld/aui" prefix="aui" %><%@
        taglib uri="http://liferay.com/tld/ui" prefix="liferay-ui" %>

        <%@ page import="com.liferay.docs.formnavextensionportlet.MyAppWebKeys" %><%@
        page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.GetterUtil" %><%@
        page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.ResourceBundleUtil" %>

        <%@ page import="java.util.ResourceBundle" %>

        <%
        boolean companyMyAppFeatureEnabled = GetterUtil.getBoolean(request.getAttribute(MyAppWebKeys.COMPANY_MY_APP_FEATURE_ENABLED));

        ResourceBundle resourceBundle = ResourceBundleUtil.getBundle("content.Language", request.getLocale(), getClass());
        %>

        <h3><liferay-ui:message key='<%= resourceBundle.getString("my-app-features") %>' /><h3>

        <aui:input checked="<%= companyMyAppFeatureEnabled %>" label='<%= resourceBundle.getString("enable-my-app-feature") %>' name="settings--myAppFeatureEnabled--" type="checkbox" value="<%= companyMyAppFeatureEnabled %>" />

3.  At the heart of your form navigation extension is your Java implementation.
    Create a Java class that  implements the
    [`FormNavigatorEntry`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/javadocs/com/liferay/portal/kernel/servlet/taglib/ui/FormNavigatorEntry.html) 
    interface, for the class type on which the form navigator operates. The
    example portlet's Java class `MyAppCompanySettingsFormNavigatorEntry` (shown
    below) implements the `FormNavigatorEntry` interface. Since it extends the
    Portal Settings form navigator which operates on model class `Company`, the
    `MyAppCompanySettingsFormNavigatorEntry` class both extends the
    `BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry` and implements the `FormNavigatorEntry`
    interface, with respect to the `Company` class. Hint: to find the name of
    the model class a form navigator operates on, see what type of object is
    passed in as the `formModelBean` attribute value for the
    [`form-navigator`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/taglibs/liferay-ui/form-navigator.html)
    tag in the respective Liferay JSP file. 

        package com.liferay.docs.formnavextensionportlet;                                      

        import java.io.IOException;
        import java.util.Locale;
        import java.util.ResourceBundle;

        import javax.portlet.PortletPreferences;
        import javax.servlet.ServletContext;
        import javax.servlet.http.HttpServletRequest;
        import javax.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse;

        import org.osgi.service.component.annotations.Component;
        import org.osgi.service.component.annotations.Reference;

        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.taglib.ui.BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.taglib.ui.FormNavigatorConstants;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.taglib.ui.FormNavigatorEntry;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.PrefsParamUtil;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.PrefsPropsUtil;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.ResourceBundleUtil;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.WebKeys;
        import com.liferay.portal.model.Company;
        import com.liferay.portal.theme.ThemeDisplay;

        @Component(
            immediate = true,
            property = {"service.ranking:Integer=20"},
            service = FormNavigatorEntry.class
        )
        public class MyAppCompanySettingsFormNavigatorEntry 
            extends BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry<Company>
                implements FormNavigatorEntry<Company> {

            @Override
            public String getCategoryKey() {
                return FormNavigatorConstants.CATEGORY_KEY_COMPANY_SETTINGS_MISCELLANEOUS;
            }

            @Override
            public String getFormNavigatorId() {
                return FormNavigatorConstants.FORM_NAVIGATOR_ID_COMPANY_SETTINGS;
            }

            @Override
            protected String getJspPath() {
                return "/portal_settings/my_app.jsp";
            }

            @Override
            public String getKey() {
                return "my-app";
            }

            @Override
            public String getLabel(Locale locale) {
                ResourceBundle resourceBundle = ResourceBundleUtil.getBundle(
                    "content.Language", locale, getClass());

                return resourceBundle.getString("my-app");
            }

            @Override
            public void include(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response)
                    throws IOException {

                ThemeDisplay themeDisplay =
                    (ThemeDisplay)request.getAttribute(WebKeys.THEME_DISPLAY);

                PortletPreferences companyPortletPreferences =
                    PrefsPropsUtil.getPreferences(themeDisplay.getCompanyId(), true);

                boolean companyMyAppFeatureEnabled =
                    PrefsParamUtil.getBoolean(
                        companyPortletPreferences, request, "myAppFeatureEnabled",
                        true);

                request.setAttribute(
                    MyAppWebKeys.COMPANY_MY_APP_FEATURE_ENABLED,
                    companyMyAppFeatureEnabled);

                super.include(request, response);
            }

            @Override
            @Reference(
                target = "(osgi.web.symbolicname=com.liferay.docs.formnavextensionportlet)",
                unbind = "-"
            )
            public void setServletContext(ServletContext servletContext) {
                super.setServletContext(servletContext);
            }

        }

This class extends abstract base class
[`BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/javadocs/com/liferay/portal/kernel/servlet/taglib/ui/BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry.html).
If you use a JSP to render your form's page, make sure to extend
`BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry`. The `BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry` base class
integrates the entry's JSP with the form navigator you target. You can
optionally use a template language to render the form page, as long as you
override `BaseJSPFormNavigatorEntry`'s `include` method and render your template
in it.

The `@Component` annotation above the class's declaration adds the class in the
OSGi registry so the targeted form navigator can retrieve it. Make sure to
specify the component annotation, set it for immediate activation, and declare
it as publishing service type `FormNavigatorEntry.class`. You can optionally
specify where to display your section entry among the category's existing
entries. You do this by setting a `service.ranking` OSGi property to an integer.
The higher the entry's service ranking integer, relative to the rankings of the
category's other entries, the higher the entry is listed in category in the form
navigation. 

Next, you can implement the getter methods that identify the form navigator,
category, and your entry's JSP, key, and label. In the `getCategoryKey` method
you return the ID of the form navigator category in which to add your section
entry. The class
[`FormNavigatorConstants`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/javadocs/com/liferay/portal/kernel/servlet/taglib/ui/FormNavigatorConstants.html)
specifies Liferay Portal's category IDs. To identify the form navigator you're
extending, implement method `getFormNavigatorId` to return that form navigator's
ID. The ID is specified as the `id` attribute value in the original JSP's
`form-navigator` tag. The form navigator IDs used in Liferay Portal are
specified in the class `FormNavigatorConstants`. To map your entry class to your
section entry's new JSP, implement method `getJspPath` to return its path. Then,
implement the `getKey` method to return a key that uniquely identifies your
entry within the form navigator. Lastly, implement the `getLabel` method to
return a label for the navigation entry. 

To apply the section entry to your app, target its OSGi bundle for the servlet
context. Add a `setServlectContext` method to invoke the parent's
`setServlectContext` method. Then add a `@Reference` annotation to target the
servlet context to your app's OSGi bundle and to unbind the servlet context.
Lastly, you can override the `include` method to implement retrieving existing
values for your JSP's form input. The Form Nav Extension portlet's `include`
method retrieves its form's values from portlet preferences. 

That's all there is to adding section entries to Liferay's form navigators.
Adding categories to existing navigators is even easier. 

To add a new category to an existing form navigator, implement the
[`FormNavigatorCategory`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/7.0-a1/javadocs/com/liferay/portal/kernel/servlet/taglib/ui/FormNavigatorCategory.html)
interface. The class needs a `@Component` annotation similar to the one you
specify for a section entry, except it must declare the category class by
specifying the publishing service type `FormNavigatorCategory.class`. In the
annotation, specify also your category class for immediate activation and
optionally set a service ranking for it. The service ranking determines where
the category is placed relative to the form navigator's other categories. Here's
an annotation that specifies all these things:

    @Component(
        immediate = true,
        property = {"service.ranking:Integer=20"},
        service = FormNavigatorCategory.class
    )

In your category implementation, you must also identify the targeted form
navigator by returning its ID in method `getFormNavigatorId`. Then, implement a
`getKey` method to return a key that uniquely identifies your category within
the form navigator. And implement the `getLabel` method to return a label for
the navigation category. 

There you have it! You now know what it takes to extend Liferay form navigators
with new section entries and categories.

**Related Topics**

<!-- TODO Add a link to the tutorial on implementing form navigation in a
custom portlet -->

[Creating a Portlet Application](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-a-portlet-application)

[Using JSPs in a Portlet Application](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/using-jsps-in-a-portlet-application)
