# Making Applications Configurable [](id=making-applications-configurable)

These tutorials explain how to make your applications configurable, and
subsequently how to read the configuration values from a variety of contexts.

Note that the methods described here are not mandatory. You can make your
applications configurable using any other mechanism that you're already
familiar with. We have found, however, that the method described below provides
the greatest benefit with the least amount of effort.

+$$$

**Note:** To quickly see a working application configuration, deploy the
`configuration-action` [Blade
sample](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-blade-samples/tree/master/gradle/apps/configuration-action)
and navigate to System Settings (*Control Panel* &rarr; *Configuration* &rarr;
*System Settings*). In the Other category, click the *Message display
configuration* entry.

Add the *Blade Message Portlet* to a page to test your configuration choices.

$$$

## Fundamentals [](id=fundamentals)

You don't need much prior knowledge to make your applications configurable, but
understanding a few key concepts is useful before diving into the code.

**Typed Configuration**
: The method described here uses *typed* configuration. The application
configuration isn't just a list of key-value pairs. Values can have types,
like `Integer`, a list of `Strings`, a URL, etc. It's even possible to use your
own custom types, although that's beyond the scope of this tutorial. Typed
configurations are easier to use than untyped configurations, and they prevent
many programmatic errors. Related to this, the configuration options should be
programmatically explicit, so that developers can use autocomplete in modern
IDEs to find out all of the configuration options of a given application or one
of its components.

**Modularity** 
: Modern applications are *modular* and built as a collection of lightweight
components. A *component* is just a class that has the `@Component` annotation,
often along with a set of properties to provide metadata. The configuration
mechanisms described here leverage the concept of components.

**Configuration Scope** 
: If your application must support different configurations at different scopes,
the APIs described below handle most of the burden for you. Even if you don'
plan to scope the application's configuration, it's important to understand the
term *configuration scope*. Here are the most common configuration scopes that
Liferay applications can have:

   - *System* configurations are unique for the complete installation of
        the application.

   - *Virtual Instance* configurations can vary per virtual instance.
 
   - *Site* configuration can vary per site.

   - *Portlet Instance* configurations apply to a single application placed on a
   page (i.e., portlets). Each placement (instance) of the application on the
   page can have a different configuration.

Enough with the conceptual stuff. You're ready to get started with some code. If
you already had a portlet or service that was configurable using the traditional
mechanisms of Liferay Portal 6.2 and before, refer to the
[Transitioning from Portlet Preferences to the Configuration API](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/transitioning-from-portlet-preferences-to-the-configuration-api) tutorial.

## Making Your Application Configurable [](id=making-your-application-configurable)

Make your application configurable with a minimal amount of code. First, you'll
learn how to create a configuration at the system scope.

First create a Java interface to represent the configuration and its default
values. Using a Java interface allows for an advanced type system for each
configuration option. Here is an example interface:

    @Meta.OCD(id = "com.liferay.docs.exampleconfig.ExampleConfiguration")
    public interface ExampleConfiguration {

        @Meta.AD(
            deflt = "blue",
            required = false
        )
        public String favoriteColor();

        @Meta.AD(
           deflt = "red|green|blue",
           required = false
        )
        public String[] validColors();

        @Meta.AD(required = false)
        public int itemsPerPage();

    }

Here's what the two Java annotations in the above snippet do:

1.  **Meta.OCD** Registers this class as a configuration with a specific id. The
    ID must be the fully qualified configuration class name.
2.  **Meta.AD** Specifies [optional
    metadata](http://bnd.bndtools.org/chapters/210-metatype.html) about the
    field, such as whether it's a required field or if it has a default value.
    Note that if you set a field as required and don't specify a default value,
    the system administrator must specify a value in order for your application
    to work properly. Use the `deflt` property to specify a default value.

The fully-qualified class name of the `Meta` class referred to above is
`aQute.bnd.annotation.metatype.Meta`. For more information about this class and
the `Meta.OCD` and `Meta.AD` annotations, please refer to the [bndtools
documentation](http://bnd.bndtools.org/chapters/210-metatype.html).

In order to use the `Meta.OCD` and `Meta.AD` annotations in your modules, you
must 
[specify a dependency](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/configuring-dependencies) 
on the bnd library. We recommend using bnd version 3. Here's an example of how 
to include this dependency in a Gradle project: 

    dependencies {
        compile group: "biz.aQute.bnd", name: "biz.aQute.bndlib", version: "3.1.0"
    }

+$$$

**Note:** The annotations `@Meta.OCD` and `@Meta.AD` are part of the bnd
library, but as of OSGi standard version R6, they're included in the OSGi core
under the names `@ObjectClassDefinition` and `@AttributeDefinition`. The OSGi
annotations can be used for simple cases like the one described in this
tutorial. However, a key difference between the two libraries is that the bnd
annotations are available at runtime, while the OSGi annotations are not.
Because runtime availability is necessary for some of the Liferay-specific features
described below, we recommend defaulting to the bnd annotations.

$$$

Add the following line to your project's `bnd.bnd` file:

    -metatype: *

This line lets bnd use your configuration interface to generate an XML
configuration file. This provides a lot of information about your application's
configuration options. Enough, in fact, to generate a [System
Settings](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/system-settings) user interface
automatically.

<!--[Figure 1: Navigate to the Control Panel and then click on *Configuration* &rarr; *System Settings*. Then click on *Platform* &rarr; *Third Party*, find the *Example configuration* link, and click on it.](../../images/example-configuration-system-settings.png)-->

## Categorizing the Configuration [](id=categorizing-the-configuration)

Because it's easy to make any application or service configurable, there are
already lots of configuration options in @product@ by default. If you've
deployed custom applications and services to your portal, there will be even
more. To make it easier for portal administrators to find the right
configuration options, specify a category for the configuration in the
auto-generated System Settings UI.

<!-- Here's how the System Settings UI looks:

IMAGES NEED TO BE UPDATED WHEN UI STABILIZES ![Figure 3: Navigate to the Control Panel, click on *Configuration* and then
*System Settings*. You'll find five categories of configurations, including
Other. Click on any configuration to access a form through which the
configuration values can be updated.](../../images/system-settings-ui.png) -->

By default, the following System Settings sections are defined, and all
available categories are nested beneath these sections:

1.  Content Management
2.  Social
3.  Platform
4.  Security
5.  Commerce
6.  Other

+$$$

**Note:** Sections are displayed if they contain at least one configuration
category. Categories are displayed if they contain at least one configuration.
The exact sections and categories available are dependent on the deployed
modules.

$$$

If you don't specify a category, your application's configuration resides in
Platform &rarr; Third Party. Developers can decide to place their configurations
in the most appropriate existing category, or even create custom categories to
facilitate discovery by their application's administrative users.

<!-- Add Figure of Platform Third Party section when UI stabilizes -->.

### Specifying a Configuration Category [](id=specifying-a-configuration-category)

To specify a different category, use the `@ExtendedObjectClassDefinition`
annotation as in the following example: 

    @ExtendedObjectClassDefinition(category = "blogs")
    @Meta.OCD(
        id = "com.liferay.blogs.configuration.BlogsConfiguration",
        localization = "content/Language", name = "blogs-configuration-name"
    )

The fully qualified class name of the `@ExtendedObjectClassDefinition` class is
`com.liferay.portal.configuration.metatype.annotations.ExtendedObjectClassDefinition`.

Note: Currently, the infrastructure used by System Settings relies on the
`configurationPid` being the same as the fully qualified class name of the
interface. If they don't match, it will not be able to provide any information
provided through `ExtendedObjectClassConfiguration`.

The `@ExtendedObjectClassDefinition` annotation is distributed through the
`com.liferay.portal.configuration.metatype` module, which you can 
[configure as a dependency](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/configuring-dependencies). 

### Creating new Sections and Categories [](id=creating-new-sections-and-categories)

It's important that configurations are in the most intuitive location (section
and category) so that administrative users find them easily. If your
configurations don't fit neatly into the existing categories or category
sections, create your own by implementing a simple interface,
`ConfigurationCategory`.

Here's the code @product@ uses to create the *Content Management* section and
the *Assets* category:

    @Component
    public class AssetsConfigurationCategory implements ConfigurationCategory {

        @Override
        public String getCategorySection() {
            return _CATEGORY_SET_KEY;
        }

        @Override
        public String getCategoryKey() {
            return _CATEGORY_KEY;
        }

        private static final String _CATEGORY_SET_KEY = "content-management";

        private static final String _CATEGORY_KEY = "assets";

    }

The `getCategorySection` method returns the String with the new section's key.
Similarly, `getCategoryKey` returns the key for the new category. Provide
localized values for these keys in your module's
`src/main/resources/content/Language.properties` file.

Next learn to specify the scope of your application's configuration.
