# Writing an Android App for Your Portal [](id=writing-an-android-app-for-your-portal)

Users expect to access portal content from their mobile devices. As an intrepid
developer, you naturally want to turn these expectations into reality.
Thankfully, Liferay provides a way for your mobile apps to access portal
content and applications with the Liferay Mobile SDK and Liferay Screens! Both 
make it possible to call Liferay's built-in remote services as well as those of 
your custom portlets. 

If you know how to develop Android apps but need a start-to-finish guide on how 
to integrate them with Liferay, you're in the right place. This Learning Path
walks you through the creation of an Android app that interacts with the
Guestbook portlet developed in the [Liferay MVC learning path](/develop/learning-paths/mvc/-/knowledge_base/6-2/beginning-liferay-development).

You should note that while this Learning Path provides complete code snippets of 
the app as it's developed, not every aspect of Android development is explained 
in detail. Focus is instead placed on the code that leverages the Liferay Mobile 
SDK and Liferay Screens. Therefore, you should know *at least* the basics of 
Android app development before attempting this Learning Path. Without this 
knowledge, you're likely to become confused. Google provides extensive 
documentation of the Android APIs as well as some basic tutorials on
[developer.android.com](http://developer.android.com/index.html). 

Basic knowledge of Android development is all you need to start working. You
needn't have completed the Liferay MVC Learning Path to obtain a working
Guestbook portlet. The complete Guestbook portlet's `.war` package is provided
for installation into your local Liferay instance. 

Now that you know what you'll be doing here, it's time to move on to the first
series of articles: Beginning Android Development for Your Portal. These 
articles walk you through the steps required to get started developing an 
Android app that interacts with Liferay.
