# Using Maven Parent Plugin Projects [](id=using-maven-parent-plugin-projects-lp-6-2-develop-tutorial)

Maven supports project inheritance. You can create a *parent* project that
contains properties that child projects have in common. You can also create
*child* projects inherit those properties from the parent project. This saves
time, since you don't need to specify those properties in each project. If you
develop more than one project, it makes sense to leverage project inheritance so
that all projects can share properties they have in common. 

We'll demonstrate Maven inheritance with a Liferay Maven project that includes a
parent/child relationship. Even if you're not going to leverage Maven's project
inheritance capabilities when you build your Liferay plugins with Maven, the
process is the same for creating any Liferay plugin with Maven's Liferay
artifacts. For more information on project inheritance, see Maven's
documentation at
[http://maven.apache.org/pom.html#Inheritance](http://maven.apache.org/pom.html#Inheritance).

We'll create our parent project and then specify the general settings needed to
build your plugins for Liferay. The parent project is similar to the project
root of the Liferay Plugins SDK. Its `pom.xml` file can specify information to
be used by any plugin projects that refer to it. You can always specify
information in each plugin's POM, but it's more convenient to use the parent
project's POM for sharing common information. 

1. Suppose you want to create a parent project named `sample-parent-project`.
   Start by creating a new directory for your parent project. For this example,
   we name the directory `sample-parent-project`. You can place the directory
   anywhere on your file system. 

2. Next, create a POM file named `pom.xml` in your `sample-parent-project`
   directory. Insert the following XML code into the POM:

		<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
		<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
		xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
		xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
			<modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
	
			<groupId>com.liferay.sample</groupId>
			<artifactId>sample-parent-project</artifactId>
			<version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
			<packaging>pom</packaging>
	
			<name>sample-parent-project</name>
			<url>http://www.liferay.com</url>
	
			<properties>
				<liferay.app.server.deploy.dir>
					${liferay.app.server.deploy.dir}
				</liferay.app.server.deploy.dir>
	
				<liferay.app.server.lib.global.dir>
					${liferay.app.server.lib.global.dir}
				</liferay.app.server.lib.global.dir>
	
				<liferay.app.server.portal.dir>
					${liferay.app.server.portal.dir}
				</liferay.app.server.portal.dir>
	
				<liferay.auto.deploy.dir>
					${liferay.auto.deploy.dir}
				</liferay.auto.deploy.dir>
	
				<liferay.version>
					${liferay.version}
				</liferay.version>
	
				<liferay.maven.plugin.version>
					${liferay.maven.plugin.version}
				</liferay.maven.plugin.version>
			</properties>
	
			<dependencies>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>portal-client</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>portal-impl</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
					<scope>provided</scope>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>portal-pacl</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
					<scope>provided</scope>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>portal-service</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
					<scope>provided</scope>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>portal-web</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
					<type>war</type>
					<scope>provided</scope>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>util-bridges</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>util-java</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>util-slf4j</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
				</dependency>
				<dependency>
					<groupId>com.liferay.portal</groupId>
					<artifactId>util-taglib</artifactId>
					<version>6.2.0-GA1</version>
				</dependency>
			</dependencies>
	
		</project>

    The POM starts by specifying the model version that Maven supports, your
    project's [Maven
    coordinates](http://maven.apache.org/pom.html#Maven_Coordinates), your
    project's name, and your company's URL. 

3. Next, the POM specifies some key Liferay property elements that your plugins
   require in order to be deployed to your Liferay portal. You can conveniently
   specify these values in a parent project for all of your plugin projects to
   leverage. A plugin project can override any of its parent's properties by
   specifying the desired property explicitly in the child plugin project's POM. 

    <!--Is the correct term not child project, but module?-->

4. Replace each Liferay property value (e.g., replace
   `${liferay.app.server.deploy.dir}` and other dereferenced `liferay.*`
   properties) with the appropriate value based on your Liferay environment. We
   describe these key properties here: 

    - `liferay.app.server.deploy.dir`: Your app server's deployment directory. 
    - `liferay.app.server.lib.global.dir`: Your app server's global library
      directory. 
    - `liferay.app.server.portal.dir`: The path to Liferay's deployment
      directory on the app server. 
    - `liferay.auto.deploy.dir`: The path of your Liferay bundle's hot-deploy
      directory `deploy/`. By specifying your Liferay instance's deploy
      directory in the POM, you're telling Maven exactly where to deploy your
      plugin artifacts. 
    - `liferay.maven.plugin.version`: The version of the Liferay Maven Plugin
      you are using. 
    - `liferay.version`: The version of Liferay you are using. 

Here's an example where we've specified these *properties* for Liferay bundled
with Apache Tomcat in a directory `C:\liferay-portal-6.2`: 

	<properties>
		<liferay.app.server.deploy.dir>
			C:\liferay-portal-6.2\tomcat-7.0.42\webapps
		</liferay.app.server.deploy.dir>

		<liferay.app.server.lib.global.dir>
			C:\liferay-portal-6.2\tomcat-7.0.42\lib\ext
		</liferay.app.server.lib.global.dir>

		<liferay.app.server.portal.dir>
			C:\liferay-portal-6.2\tomcat-7.0.42\webapps\root
		</liferay.app.server.portal.dir>

		<liferay.auto.deploy.dir>
			C:\liferay-portal-6.2\deploy
		</liferay.auto.deploy.dir>

		<liferay.maven.plugin.version>
			6.2.0
		</liferay.maven.plugin.version>

		<liferay.version>
			6.2.0
		</liferay.version>
	</properties>

You can also specify these key properties in your Global or User `settings.xml`
file. To learn more about this method, visit the *Configuring Your Liferay Maven
Project* section of the *Using Maven From Liferay IDE* tutorial.

The Liferay plugins you develop depend on several Liferay artifacts. We've
included them in individual `dependency` elements within the POM's
`dependencies` element. All of your parent project's modules (i.e., projects
that refer to this parent) can leverage these dependencies. 

---

![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) **Note:** You could just as easily
include such dependencies in the POM of each of your plugin projects, but
specifying them in a parent project makes them accessible to child projects
through inheritance. 

---
 
## Next Steps [](id=next-steps-lp-6-2-develop-tutorial-8)

Now that you specified your project's general information, your Liferay
environment properties, and the Liferay artifacts on which Liferay plugin
projects depend, it's time to learn how to create a plugin project using
Liferay's archetypes:

[Creating Liferay Maven Plugins from Liferay IDE](http://www.liferay.com)
