# Form Success Pages

After users submit one of your whiz-bang forms, what next? How will they know
they're done, and can close the browser window or tab? What if they think their
submission didn't go through, and wonder if they need to fill out the whole form
again? By default, submitting a form brings you back to the first page of the
form, and it's now blank. Don't leave users feeling lost, relying on the default
success message to assure them that their form entry was successfully submitted.
Instead, configure a Success Page.

![Figure x: There's a default success message that alerts users that their request completed successfully.](../../images/your-request-completed-successfully.png)

The success page is simple. It has a title in bold text, and a description
beneath the title. A common alternative to using a success page is to [redirect
users to a different page in your site](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/creating-advanced-forms#redirecting-users-after-form-submission).

The success page is a terminal page that just gives form users a message that
they've finished filling out the form and their submission was received
successfully. A success page can even urge users to close the browser window or
tab.

What should you put in the success page? Whatever you want. If you can't think
of anything important or creative to say, use the default message:

![Figure x: There's a default success page message if you just can't think of anything else to say.](../../images/forms-success-page-default.png)

To configure a success page, 

1.  Add a form in Site Administration &rarr; Content &rarr; Forms. 

2.  Click on the form page's Actions
    (![Actions](../../images-dxp/icon-actions.png)) button and choose *Add
    Success Page*.

![Figure x: Add a success page using the edit menu for the form page.](../../images/forms-success-page-add.png)

Once the success page is added to your form, fill in the Title and Description
fields however you please. When the form is Saved and Published, the Success
Page is live for your form users.

+$$$

**Note:** You can't preview the success page. Success pages can only be viewed
once a form is submitted, and the Submit button isn't available in the form
preview. The Preview Form link in the form builder let's you preview the form's
regular pages (use the Next button to navigate through the form) only.

To see what your success page looks like, just submit a test entry of the form,
and delete if you need to. For more on viewing and managing form entries, see
[here](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/managing-form-entries#viewing-form-entries).

$$$

Success pages help form users feel that their form experience is complete. They
allow you to craft a suitable message to assure form users that everything is
working as expected. 

