# Writing Your First Liferay Application

It's easy to get started with your first Liferay application. We'll guide you
through the step-by-step process of creating your project and deploying your
application to Liferay. Before you know it, you'll have your application
deployed alongside of the applications that come with Liferay.

Your first application is simple: you'll build a guestbook application that
looks like this:

![Figure x: You'll create this simple application.](../../images/first-guestbook-portlet.png)

By default, it shows guestbook messages that various users have left on your
website. To add a message, you click the *Add Entry* button to show a form that
lets you enter and save a message.

Ready to write your first Liferay application?

## Creating Your First Liferay Application

Let's jump right in and create your first project. Applications in Liferay
Portal are called *portlets* so you'll create a portlet project. You'll use the
[Blade Tools](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/introduction-to-blade-tools)
command line tool to create your application. The new Liferay application
wizards available in Liferay IDE and Liferay Developer Studio use Blade Tools
under the hood. Thus, new projects can be created the same way regardless of
your specific development environment or IDE.

Blade Tools allows you to create a Liferay workspace. A Liferay workspace is a
generated environment that contains both your Liferay projects and a Liferay
bundle on which to test them. The recommended way to develop applications for
Liferay 7 is to use a Liferay workspace. To create a Liferay workspace, follow
the instructions in the Creating a Liferay Workspace article:
[https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-a-liferay-workspace](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-a-liferay-workspace)
Once your Liferay workspace is created, create a
`beginning-liferay-development` folder in your Liferay workspace's `modules`
folder. Navigate to the new folder and then use this command to create your
Guestbook application:

    blade create -c GuestbookPortlet -p com.liferay.docs.guestbook com.liferay.docs.guestbook

This command creates a project named `com.liferay.docs.guestbook`. `-c
GuestbookPortlet` specifies the name of the class to be generated. `-p
com.liferay.docs.guestbook` specifies the package in which the class is to be
generated. By default, the `mvcportlet` template is used. You can explicitly
specify this using the `-t mvcportlet` option. When you use the `mvcportlet`
template, Blade Tools creates a portlet class (the name of which can be
specified with the `-c` option) in a package (the name of which can be
specified by the `-p` option) in your project's `src/main/java` folder. Blade
Tools also creates your application's JSP files and language properties file in
your project's `src/main/resources` folder.

After you've created your project, import it into Liferay IDE.

Note: Two important concepts for Liferay 7 development are modules and
components. A *module* is the one and only type of Liferay 7 plugin. A
*component* is an implementation of an interface. In Liferay, a component is
typically a
[Declarative Services](http://wiki.osgi.org/wiki/Declarative_Services)
component, which means that it's a Java class that's decorated with the
`org.osgi.service.component.annotations.Component` annotation. Please see the [Understanding Liferay's Module Framework](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/understanding-liferays-module-framework)
tutorial for more information on Liferay modules, components, and Liferay's
module framework. In this learning path, you're creating a single module called
`com.liferay.docs.guestbook`. In this module, you're creating a single
component: the `GuestbookPortlet` class which implements the `Portlet`
interface.

## What is a Portlet?

When you access a web site, you interact with an application. That application
might be simple: it might only show you one piece of information, such as an
article. The application might be complex: you could be doing your taxes
online, inputting lots of data into an application that calculates whether you
owe or are due a refund. These applications run on a *platform* that provides
application developers the building blocks they need to make applications.

![Figure x: Many Liferay applications can run at the same time on the same page.](../../images/portlet-applications.png)

Liferay Portal is a platform, and its applications are called *portlets*. One
difference between a Liferay application and an application built on another
platform is that Liferay Portal can serve many applications on the same page at
the same time. Usually, a web application takes up the entire page. If you
want, you can do this with Liferay as well. But Liferay has the added benefit
of being able to run many applications on the same page. Liferay's framework
takes this into account at every step. For example, features like
platform-generated URLs exist to support Liferay's ability to serve multiple
applications on the same page.

Even though all you've done is generate it, the Guestbook project that you
created in the previous section is ready to be built and deployed to Liferay.
Make sure your Liferay 7 instance is running. To start it from a Liferay
workspace, use this command:

    blade server start

To automatically deploy your application using Blade Tools, you first need to
install the remote agent. To install it, use this command:

    blade agent install

After the blade agent has been installed, run this command from your project:

    blade deploy

The command above both builds and deploys your project.

Next, check that your application is available in Liferay. Open a browser,
navigate to your portal ([http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) by
default), and add your application to a page. To add an application to a page,
click on the *Add* button (it looks like a plus sign) and then on
*Applications*. In this list, your application should appear in the Sample
category. Its name should be `com.liferay.docs.guestbook JSP Portlet`. You can
change this name by editing the `javax.portlet.display-name` property in your
`GuestbookPortlet` class. E.g., you could use

    "javax.portlet.display-name=Guestbook"

to change the display name of your application to `Guestbook`.

This property string should be added to the `property` array defined in the
`@Component` annotation of your `GuestbookPortlet` class.

![Figure x: This is the default Liferay homepage. It contains several portlet applications including the initial version of the Guestbook application that was created by Blade Tools.](../../images/default-portlet-application.png)

Now you're ready to jump in and start developing your Guestbook portlet.

## Creating an Add Guestbook Button

A guestbook application is pretty simple, right? People come to your site,
enter their names and brief messages, and then post them. Users can read the
entries that others posted, and they can post entries themselves.

The first thing, therefore, that we need is a landing page that displays
entries and that has a button on it that allows users to add an entry. This
page was created when you created your project: you'll find it in your
project's `src/main/resources/META-INF/resources` folder. It's called
`view.jsp`. Open this file:

    <%@ include file="/init.jsp" %>

    <p>
        <b><liferay-ui:message key="com_liferay_docs_guestbook_GuestbookPortlet.caption"/></b>
    </p>

As you can see, this file contains some sample content since Blade Tools
generated a fully functional sample portlet. First of all, `view.jsp` imports
`init.jsp`. By convention, all JSP imports and tag library declarations in a
Liferay JSP portlet application are made in an `init.jsp` file. Every other JSP
file in the application imports `init.jsp`. This convention ensures that JSP
dependency management can always be handled from a single fie.

Besides importing `init.jsp`, `view.jsp` simply displays a message that
corresponds to a language key. This key and its value are declared in your
project's `src/main/resources/content/Language.properties` file. Let's add some
functionality to your Guestbook application by adding a button that says *Add
Entry*.

1. First, remove the paragraph containing the default message from `view.jsp`.

2. Next, add the following AlloyUI tags to display an Add Entry button inside
   of a button row:

        <aui:button-row>
            <aui:button value="Add Entry"></aui:button>
        </aui:button-row>

Notice that you can use `aui` tags in `view.jsp` since `init.jsp` includes the
AlloyUI tag library declaration by default (as well as other important imports
and two useful tags):

        <%@ taglib uri="http://java.sun.com/jsp/jstl/core" prefix="c" %>
        <%@ taglib uri="http://java.sun.com/portlet_2_0" prefix="portlet" %>

        <%@ taglib uri="http://liferay.com/tld/aui" prefix="aui" %>
        <%@ taglib uri="http://liferay.com/tld/portlet" prefix="liferay-portlet" %>
        <%@ taglib uri="http://liferay.com/tld/theme" prefix="liferay-theme" %>
        <%@ taglib uri="http://liferay.com/tld/ui" prefix="liferay-ui" %>

        <portlet:defineObjects />

        <liferay-theme:defineObjects />

Your application now displays a button instead of a message but the button
currently doesn't do anything. Next, you'll learn about system-generated URLs
since you need a URL to map to your button.

### Generating URLs for Portlets

Since portlets are designed to be placed on pages by end users, and end users
can place multiple portlets on a page, and you as the developer have no idea
what other portlets will share a page with yours, guess what? You can't define
URLs for various functions in your application like you may be used to. Why? A
simple example should explain.

Say you've written a Calendar application that a user has placed on the same
page as a Blog application. The Calendar allows the user to add and delete
events. The Blog allows the user to add and delete blog entries. To implement
the functionality for deleting, both application developers elected to append
the *del* parameter to the URL, and give it a primary key value so the
application can go look up the calendar event or the blog entry and delete it.

Since both applications read this parameter, when a user uses the delete
function in either one of them, both applications attempt to delete either a
calendar event or a blog entry that matches the given ID. In other words, the
applications are clashing because they use the same URL parameter.
system-generated URLs are designed to prevent this from happening. Creating a
system-generated URL is easy:

1. Add these tags below the `<%@ include file="/init.jsp" %>` line but above
   the `<aui:button-row>` tag:

        <portlet:renderURL var="addEntryURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/edit_entry.jsp"></portlet:param>
        </portlet:renderURL>

2. Add this attribute to the `<aui:button>` tag:

        onClick="<%= addEntryURL.toString() %>"

    Your `view.jsp` page should now look like this:

        <%@ include file="/init.jsp" %>

        <portlet:renderURL var="addEntryURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/edit_entry.jsp"></portlet:param>
        </portlet:renderURL>

        <aui:button-row>
            <aui:button onClick="<%= addEntryURL.toString() %>" value="Add Entry"></aui:button>
        </aui:button-row>

The `var` attribute of the `<portlet:renderURL>` tag creates a variable to hold
the system-generated URL. In this example, the generated URL will be stored in
a variable named `addEntryURL`. The `<portlet:param>` tag defines a URL
parameter which is appended to the generated URL. In this example, a URL
parameter named `mvcPath` with a value of `/edit_entry` is appended to the URL.

Notice that your `GuestbookPortlet` class extends `MVCPortlet`, which is
Liferay's MVC portlet class. In a Liferay MVC portlet, the `mvcPath` URL
parameter is used to indicate a page within your portlet application. To
navigate to another page in your portlet application, use a portal URL with the
parameter `mvcPath` to indicate the specific page.

In the example above, you created a `renderURL` that points to your
application's `edit_entry.jsp` page, which you haven't yet created. Note that
using an AlloyUI button to follow the generated URL is not required. You could
have used any HTML construct that contains a link. Users can click on your
button to access your application's `edit_entry.jsp` page. This currently
produces an error since no `edit_entry.jsp` exists yet. Creating the
`edit_entry.jsp` page is your next step.

### Creating a Page for Adding Guestbook Entries

In the same folder your `view.jsp` is in, create the `edit_entry.jsp` file:

1. Right-click on your project's `src/main/resources/META-INF/resources` folder
   and choose *New* &rarr; *File*.

2. Name the file `edit_entry.jsp` and click *Finish*.

3. Add this line to the top of the file:

        <%@ include file="/init.jsp" %>

    As mentioned previously, it's a best practice to add all of your JSP
    imports and tag library declarations to a single file which is imported by
    every other JSP file in your application. For your `edit_entry.jsp` file,
    you need these imports so that you can access to the portlet tags to create
    URLs and to the Alloy tags to create the form.

4. You'll create two URLs: one to submit the form and one to go back to the
   previous page: `view.jsp`. To create the URL to go back to `view.jsp`, add
   the following tags below the first line you added:

        <portlet:renderURL var="viewURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/view.jsp"></portlet:param>
        </portlet:renderURL>

Next, you need to create a new URL for submitting the form. Before you do, some
explanation is in order.

### Using Portlet Actions

As has been stated already, portlets are designed to run in a portion of a
page. A page can contain multiple portlets. Because of this, portlets have two
*phases* of operation. The first phase is the one you've already used: it's
called the *render* phase. All this means is that the portlet draws itself,
using the JSPs you write for it.

The other phase is called the *action* phase. This phase runs once, when a user
triggers a portlet action. The portlet performs whatever action the user
triggered, such as performing a search or adding a record to a database. Then,
based on what happened in the action, the portlet goes back to the render phase
and re-renders itself according to its new state.

To save a guestbook entry, you'll have to trigger a portlet action. For this,
you'll create an action URL.

1. Add the following tag after the closing `</portlet:renderURL>` tag:

        <portlet:actionURL name="addEntry" var="addEntryURL"></portlet:actionURL>

You now have the two required URLs for your form.

### Creating a Form

Your guestbook form is pretty simple. All you need are two fields: one for the
name of the person submitting the entry and one for the entry itself.

1. Add the following tags to the end of your `edit_entry.jsp` file:

        <aui:form action="<%= addEntryURL %>" name="<portlet:namespace />fm">
                <aui:fieldset>
                    <aui:input name="name"></aui:input>
                    <aui:input name="message"></aui:input>
                </aui:fieldset>

                <aui:button-row>
                    <aui:button type="submit"></aui:button>
                    <aui:button type="cancel" onClick="<%= viewURL.toString() %>"></aui:button>
                </aui:button-row>
        </aui:form>

Save `edit_entry.jsp` and redeploy your application. If you refresh the page
and click the *Add Entry* button, your form appears. If you click the *Cancel*
button, it works! However, don't click the *Save* button yet. You haven't yet
created the action that saves a guestbook entry, so clicking *Save* will
produce an error.

![Figure x: This is the Guestbook application's form for adding entries.](../../images/first-guestbook-portlet.png)

Implementing the portlet action (what happens when the user clicks *Save*) is
your next task.

### Implementing Portlet Actions

When users submit the form, your application needs to store the form data so it
can be displayed in the guestbook. To keep this first application simple, you'll
implement this using a part of the Portlet API called Portlet Preferences.
Normally, of course, you'd use a database, and Liferay makes it very easy to
work with databases using its Service Builder framework. For now, however, you
can create the first iteration of your guestbook application using portlet
preferences.

To make your portlet do anything other than re-render itself, you must
implement portlet actions. An action defines some processing, usually based on
user input, that the portlet must perform before it renders itself. In the case
of the guestbook portlet, the action you need to implement saves a guestbook
entry that a user typed into the form. Saved guestbook entries can be retrieved
and displayed later.

Since you're using Liferay's MVC Portlet framework, you have an easy way to
implement actions. Portlet actions can be implemented in the portlet class,
which acts as the controller. In the form you just created, you made an action
URL, and you called it `addEntry`. To create a portlet action, you create a
method in the portlet class with the same name. `MVCPortlet` calls that method
when a user triggers its matching URL.

1. Open the `GuestbookPortlet.java`. Blade Tools generated this class when you
   created the portlet project.

2. Create a method with the following signature:

        public void addEntry(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response) {

        }

3. Add the required `javax.portlet.ActionRequest` and
   `javax.portlet.ActionResponse` imports.

You've now created a portlet action. It doesn't do anything, but at least you
won't get an error now if you submit your form. Next, you should make the
action save the form data.

Because of the limitations of the portlet preferences API, you need to store
each guestbook entry as a `String` in a string array. Since you have two fields
in your form, you need to have a delimiter so you can determine where the user
name ends and the guestbook entry begins. The caret symbol (`^`) makes a good
delimiter because users are highly unlikely to use that symbol in a guestbook
entry.

+$$$

**Note:** Clearly, using portlet preferences and string delimiters is not the
best way to implement a mechanism for saving guestbook entries. This approach
is easy to implement but it's really just a shortcut that should only be
considered when developing a prototype application. To learn how to implement a
robust mechanism for saving application data, follow the *Writing a Data-Driven
Application* learning path.

$$$

The following method implements adding a guestbook entry to a portlet preference
called `guestbook-entries`:

    public void addEntry(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response) {
        try {
            PortletPreferences prefs = request.getPreferences();

            String[] guestbookEntries = prefs.getValues("guestbook-entries",
                    new String[1]);

            ArrayList<String> entries = new ArrayList<String>();

            if (guestbookEntries != null) {
                entries = new ArrayList<String>(Arrays.asList(prefs.getValues(
                        "guestbook-entries", new String[1])));
            }

            String userName = ParamUtil.getString(request, "name");
            String message = ParamUtil.getString(request, "message");
            String entry = userName + "^" + message;

            entries.add(entry);

            String[] array = entries.toArray(new String[entries.size()]);

            prefs.setValues("guestbook-entries", array);

            try {
                prefs.store();
            }
            catch (IOException ex) {
                Logger.getLogger(GuestbookPortlet.class.getName()).log(
                        Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
            }
            catch (ValidatorException ex) {
                Logger.getLogger(GuestbookPortlet.class.getName()).log(
                        Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
            }

        }
        catch (ReadOnlyException ex) {
            Logger.getLogger(GuestbookPortlet.class.getName()).log(
                    Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
        }
    }

First, the preferences are retrieved, and then the `guestbook-entries`
preference is retrieved and converted to an `ArrayList` so that you can add an
entry without worrying about exceeding the size of the array. Next, the name
and message fields from your form are retrieved. Note that Liferay's
`ParamUtil` class makes it very easy to retrieve URL parameters.

Finally, the fields are combined into a `String` delimited by a caret, and the
new entry is added to the `ArrayList`, which is then converted back to an array
so it can be stored as a preference. The try/catch blocks are required by the
portlet preferences API.

This is not the normal way to use portlet preferences, but it provides a quick
and easy way for you to store guestbook entries in this first version of your
application. You'll implement a robust way to store guestbook entries in a
later learning path.

The next and final feature to implement is a mechanism for viewing guestbook
entries.

## Viewing Guestbook Entries

To view guestbook entries, you have to do the reverse of what you did to store
them: retrieve them from portlet preferences, loop through them, and present
them on the page. The best way to do this with the MVC Portlet is to use the
Model-View-Controller paradigm. You already have the view (your JSP files) and
your controller (your portlet class). Now you need your model.

### Creating Your Model

1. Create a new package in your app called `com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model`.
   You can do this by right-clicking on your `src/main/java` folder and
   selecting *New* &rarr; *Package*, and then entering the package name in the
   dialog box that appears.

2. Next, create your model class. This is a simple Java bean that contains a
   guestbook entry. Right-click on your new package and select *New* &rarr;
   *Class*. Give your class the name `Entry` and click *Finish*.

You now have a Java class for your guestbook entries, and your next task is to
give it the fields you need to store entries.

1. Create two private String variables: `name` and `message`.

2. Right-click on a blank area of the editor and select *Source* &rarr;
   *Generate Getters and Setters*.

3. Next, provide two constructors: one that initializes the class with no
   values for the two fields, and one that takes the two fields as parameters
   and sets their values. Your completed class should look like this:

        package com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model;

        public class Entry {

            private String name;
            private String message;

            public Entry() {
                this.name = null;
                this.message = null;
            }

            public Entry(String name, String message) {
                setName(name);
                setMessage(message);
            }

            public String getName() {
                return name;
            }

            public String getMessage() {
                return message;
            }

            public void setName(String name) {
                this.name = name;
            }

            public void setMessage(String message) {
                this.message = message;
            }

        }

Now that you have your model, you have an easy way of encapsulating guestbook
entries so that they can be processed by the controller layer and displayed by
the view layer. Your next step is to enhance the controller (your portlet
class) so that guestbook entries are processed and ready to display when users
see the guestbook application.

### Customizing How Your Application is Rendered

As mentioned earlier, portlet applications have two basic phases: render and
action. To make the guestbook show the saved guestbook entries when users view
the application, you need to customize your portlet's render functionality,
which it's currently inheriting from its parent class, `MVCPortlet`.

1. Open `GuestbookPortlet.java` and add the following method below your
   `addEntry` method:

        @Override
        public void render(RenderRequest renderRequest, RenderResponse renderResponse)
                throws PortletException, IOException {

            PortletPreferences prefs = renderRequest.getPreferences();
            String[] guestbookEntries = prefs.getValues("guestbook-entries",
                    new String[1]);

            if (guestbookEntries != null) {
                List<Entry> entries = parseEntries(guestbookEntries);

                renderRequest.setAttribute("entries", entries);
            }

            super.render(renderRequest, renderResponse);
        }

    This method retrieves the array of guestbook entries from portlet
    preferences, converts it to a `List` of `Entry` objects, and places that
    `List` into the request object. It then calls the parent class's `render`
    method.

2. Beneath the `render` method, add the following method that converts the
   array to a `List` of your model objects:

        private List<Entry> parseEntries(String[] guestbookEntries) {
            List<Entry> entries = new ArrayList<Entry>();

            for (String entry : guestbookEntries) {
                String[] parts = entry.split("\\^", 2);
                Entry gbEntry = new Entry(parts[0], parts[1]);
                entries.add(gbEntry);
            }

            return entries;
        }

As you can see, this method splits the entries in the `String` array into two
parts based on the caret (`^`) character.

Now that you have your controller preparing your data for display, your next
step is to implement the view, so users can see guestbook entries.

### Displaying Guestbook Entries

Liferay's development framework makes it easy to loop through data and display
it nicely to the end user. You'll use a Liferay UI construct called the *Search
Container* to make this happen.

1. Add the these tags to your `view.jsp` below the closing
   `</portlet:renderURL>` tag but before the opening `<aui:button-row>` tag:

        <jsp:useBean id="entries" class="java.util.ArrayList" scope="request"/>

        <liferay-ui:search-container>
            <liferay-ui:search-container-results results="<%= entries %>" />

            <liferay-ui:search-container-row
                className="com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Entry"
                modelVar="entry"
            >
                <liferay-ui:search-container-column-text property="message" />

                <liferay-ui:search-container-column-text property="name" />
            </liferay-ui:search-container-row>

            <liferay-ui:search-iterator />
        </liferay-ui:search-container>

Save your work, deploy your application, and try adding some guestbook entries.

## Next Steps

Here are more tutorials that you might find interesting:

[Creating Liferay Applications](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-liferay-applications)

[Creating Liferay Components](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-liferay-components)
